The Astrological Self-Instructor (1893) - B. Suryanarain Row
Translator: n/a | Coverage: complete; introductory primer
Cite as (slug, PDF page). Verify against the page image before trusting a rule.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 1] =====
The
astrological
self instructor

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 2] =====
Harvard College
Library

I
(AVE) | ण

|

FROM THE BEQUEST OF

SUSAN GREENE DEXTER [z

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 3] =====


===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 4] =====


===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 5] =====
THE

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR,

 

BY

3B. SURYANARAIN ROW, B. A.

AUTHOR OF

A Shoré Compendium of Astrology,

  
 

Manvat or Cuxss,
; Jubilee Sketch of the Queen-Empress Victoria,
४ Geographical Primer,
The Astrological Primer,
ete. etc. etc.
SECOND EDITION IMPROVED,

All rights reserved.

 

BELLARY ;
Printed. AT THE NEUTRAL PREss,
1893.

Postage ete, 4

 

Price Per Copy Rs. 1—4—0. a

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 6] =====
4 2.2
A422.
ज

. ०.4. 2

HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY

DEXTER FUND
Way य फ

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 7] =====
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
EE

en years ago, I published a small pamphlet on the
subject of Astrology in Hoglish and Kanarese. It was my
maiden attempt and the venture proved successful beyond
my expectations. The present great demand for it shows
that I was not mistaken in my labours. Various circums-
tances prevented me from publishing this book earlier
and my humble labours, such as they are, I hope, will pre-
pare the way for those, who did not take themselves to
the sublime study of Astrology, simply for want of ele- `
mentary books on the subject. I cannot close these lines
without expressing my obligation to my friend V.
Subbaraya Mudliar, English Head Clerk, Collectors
Office, Bellary, for the help he gave me both in the pre-
paration of the book, and in the revision of press proofs,

B. SURYANARAIN ROW, B. A,

March 1892, }
Bellary, India.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 8] =====
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION,

eee

The sale of a 1,000 copies of my Astrological Self
Instructor within 4 or 5 months after its publication is a
certain proof that there is a very great demand for easy
and elementary treatises by competent men on this all
absorbing subject. I lately published another book |
called the Astrological Primer and it has been equally
acceptable to the discerning public. The patronage of
the educated gentlemen and the most flattering remarks
regarding my astrological publications have encouraged .
me to devote more of my time to the explanation of its
technical principles, andI have, as a preliminary step, ad-
ded in this edition illustrative horoscopes of living and.
dead persons. This, the reader will see, is a very great in-
provement in the right direction. As the editor of the
“Argus,” Madras,for nearly four years I had ample oppor-
tunities of weighing the editorial cpinions of the Indian
Wewspapers,and thus I feel no necessity to submit a scien-
tific book for Newspaper reviews. In many cases their
opinions are utterly valueless and greatly prejudiced.
The public are the best critics and to them I willingly
submit the following pages for acceptance.

B. SURYANARAIN ROW, B. A,

April, 1893,
Bellary, India. }

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 9] =====
DEDICATION.

To, ^
B. JAGANATHA ROW,

Mysore Service.
Asa token of the long and pleasant heurs spent
from childhood in all its phases of development in your
company and the sincere interest evinced by you in my
progress, this book is lovingly dedicated to you by your
affectionate brother,

The Author.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 10] =====
AUTHORITIES.

 

The following authors and books have been consulted
in the preparation of this work. Vasista, Narada, Sakthi,
Parasara, Vysa, Vishnugupta, Devala, Maya, Yavana,
Jaimini, Manitha, Satyacharya, Jivasarma, Mandavya,
Bharadwaja, Gargi,Sankaracharya, Vidyaranya, Bhattot-
pala, Varahamibiracharya, Kalamruta, Sarvarthachinta-
mani, Manasagari, Moohurthamarthanda, _Moohurthaga-
napathy, Moohurthadarpana, Gopalaratnakara, Saravali,
Nekshatrachudamani, Jainandramala, Oodudasapradipi-
ka, Jatakalankara, Jatakakalanidhi, Yogavali, Keralam.
and other ancient sanscrit books.

In the Introduction I have consulted the works of
Roscoe, Kirchoff, Stewart, Johnson, Tyndal, Spencer,
Bain, Huxley,, Proctor, Herschell, Lardner, Maxwell
Lockeyar and other eminent scientists. ^

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 11] =====
CONTENTS.

Paces.
Tntroduction ... ५०५ ee tes tes » 170
CHAPTER—1.
Years of the Hindu cycle... we ea we 71
Hindu months and Ayanas... oe tee we OTL
Hindu seasons or Ruthus_..., ee oo we «7D
Hindu constellations ... : ०० ०. 72
Identification marks for constellations ... ०, 78
Zodiacal signs... wee ०८ oe wee ०. O74
Names of the planets. ०.५ ae wee ०. 74
Good and evil planets . oO 74
Symbols used for planets and zodiacal signs 75
Movable and fixed signs =... ० eee 75
Common, masculine, cruel, feminine, mild, noc-
‘turnal, diurnal, Sirshodaya, Prustodaya, Oo-
dbhayodaya signs -.. ०५ oes owe §=76
Signs representing the various organs - 76
Planetary aspects... +. + wee 78
Friendship etc, among the planets = ० शर
Temporary friandship. : wee | wee 78
Planetary Natures ... ०० 79
Fiery, Earthy, Héavenly, Watery and Airy. pla-
nets . ० . . = oe 80
Planetary colors. ... ०० ० pee oe 80
Planetary direetions and representations ... 80
Quadrants, Trienes ... os ane ase ==» 86
Oopachayams or improving houses ... ० ० 81
Panaparams कणत्‌ 4.पकणृाोणक्षणड = ०, ee =» 81
Planetary exaltations... 00. sso eve 81
Do. Debilitations. ० ०० 81
Do- Moolathrikonams .. one vee 81

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 12] =====
il CONTENTS.

Periods of planetary revolutions

Retrograde and accellerated motions.

Combust planets
Planetary characteristics
Hora...

Periods of the Zodiacal signs

Origen of the week-days

Drakkanam, Navamsam and Dwadasamsam

Thrimsamsam

Significations of the different signs

Shastiumsas ee
Planetary Vergas -.-

Signification of the Houses ~
CHAPTER—IL.

Planetary states. oe
Planetary occupations..

vee

Planetary Periods or Dasas ...

Planetary Sub-Periods.

Table of Planetary Sub-Periods

५.५

oe

CHAPTER—III.

How to find the birth sign

Death in Early life or Balarista
Counteracting influences for early death ..

Short life १.५ tee
Middle life... a.
Long life tee +
Unlimited periods of life

CHAPTER—IV

Misfortunes  ...

०००

००५

CHAPTER—V

Planets in different houses

५

€

82
82
83
83
84
85
85
86
87
87
89
89
90

91
93
98
97
98

100
108
107
108
109
110

112 |

118 |

` 120 |

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 13] =====
CONTENTS, ill

The Sun in the 12 houses... ae 10 ,.. 120

The Moon do. coo eee vee ० 122
Mars do. wee tee we ०. 128
Mercury १० one Goo 0 oe 124
Jupiter do. ave te tee we 125
Venus do. bes ०८ wee se. 127
Saturn do. tne aoe oes ० 128
Dragon’s Head do. ० ¢ 0 ee 129
Do. Tail do. wee aa 130
CHAPTER—VI.
Combinations for Sovereignty. .. ...  ... 131
CHAPTER—VII.
, Significations of the Signs.
First house ... wee tee ¬ eee ... 188

Second house ... ose ee 0 wee oe. 187
Third house ... ore eee oo 0 ० 14
Fourth house... = न र „4 „.. 148.
Fifth house... rn व one eee ०० 146
Sixth house .., neces aoe on .» 148
Seventh house... nee ase ० on ०. 150
Figth house ... र. on ० ० vee 155
Ninth house .., ‘os (त) vee ००० ०. 156
Tenth house ... naa व nee vee ~. 158
Eleventh house wes tee oo ५. ०. 160
Twelfth house... + on tre १. oe 161
CHAPTER—VIII.
Miscellaneous Combinations.

Rajju, Musala, Nala, and Audhi yogas”... ० 168
Sunapha, Anapha, Dhurdhura and Kemadrama

yogas... ०९५ toe ० ane oe we 164
YVasumathiyoga.. bee tee 00 vee ,.. 168

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 14] =====
iv CONTENTS.

Gada, Sakata, Vihaga, Hala, Srungataka, Yoopa,
Ishu, Sakthi, Danda, Now, Koota yogas...

Chatra, Dhanas, Ardachundra, Vallaki, Damini,

Pasa, Kedara, Shula, Yuga, Golaka yogas

CHAPTER—IX.

Lunar Effects ... . oe व
CHAVTER—X.

Planetary Inftuences in the signs ...

CHAPTER—XI.

Results of Planetary Aspects... ०

CHAPTER—XII.

Effects of Exaltations... bes ...

CHAPTER—XIII.

Female Horoscopes ... वि ,..

CHAPTER—XIV.

CHAPTER—XV.,

Lost Horoscopes .. we aoe

CHAPTER—XVI.

Planetary Periods ee

1१ 1. aes

००

179

182

184

188

192

195
201

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 15] =====
INTRODUCTION.

I believe I am the first writer in India on the sub-
ject of Astrology in English. The very rapid sale of my
little pamphlet on Astrology entitled “A Short Compendium
of Astrology in English and Canarese” (2000 copies)
published in 1882, and the subsequent great demand for
more copies encouraged’ me to issue an improved and
‘much enlarged edition. The exhaustive treatise promised
by me to the public will be published later on. When
completed it will be a good reference book both for stu-
dents and adepts in this branch of knowledge, and will
also contain a large number of illustrations and examples
with a fine colored Zodiacal map of the heavenly planets.
My book and the series of astrological lectures I delivered
in my tours, I am sure, have created a good deal of
interest in the minds of the educated public in India,
and Iam greatly encouraged in this view by the kind
suggestions of several able men who have written to me
on the subject, desiring me to treat Astrology more scien-
tifically and meet such of those objections against its
belief as could be done with my limited knowledge and
time at command. Astrology has been much neglected
and hastily judged, and it isa great pity that it has not
been properly and thoroughly ‘investigated. My present
attempt has been to produce a cheap and useful book,
written in an casy and untechnical style and to introduce
the beginner to the higher branches of the Astrological
sciences without many of those difficulties, which gencrally

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 16] =====
2 INTRODUCTION.

beset works of this kind. Books treating on scientific
and technical subjects should be as simple as_ possible if
_ they are to be really useful to the general public. Within
the narrow compass of this small primer it will not be
possible to attempt to reconcile satisfactorily the formulas
of Astrology with the principles of the physical sciences.
But anything said on this subject will not be out of place
ina work of this kind. Astrology like medicine is a
practical science, and therefore requires to be handled as
such. Even the different religious systems which have
not been scientifically explained or which cannot be so
dealt with have lost much of their hold upon the enquir-
ing minds. It is as it ought to be,and we might reasonably
expect healthy results from such a state of things.
Human intellect is stimulated, enlarged, and developed,
and sooner or later we must be prepared to meet with thoso
religious, social and intellectual changes which are the
indispensible forerunners of such critical times. The
science of Astrology was assiduously cultivated by the best
intellects the world had ever seen, and when so many
geniuses, no mean ones judging them from their other
works, believed in it, it would certainly be absurd to
bring home to them the serious charges of ignorance and
imposture. Vasista, Narada, Parasara, Vyasa, Jaimini,
Manu, Varaha Mihiracharya, Sankaracharya, Ramanuja-
charya, Madhavacharya, Vidyaranya, Chanikya, Budda,
Yavanacharya, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Diogenese,
Cicero, Cesar, Ptolomy, Copernicus, Kepler, Tycho Brahe,
Bacon, Newton, Confucius and other eminent men believed
in Astrology and most of these have also written works on
that subject. This is a matter which merits our careful
attention. Most of these illustrious men lived a saintly
life and are honored for their intellectual greatness. They

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 17] =====
INTRODUCTION. 3

never stood in need of the fruits of their imposture and
consequently we find no selfish or mean motive to actuate
them to write upon a subject which they believed to be
false. No man can be said to be competent to pronounce
‘an opinion upon any subject unless and untilhe has devoted
sometime to its study and investigation. The opinions
of many of the educated youths of the present day are
to be held without any value until we know they have
seriously thought over the matter. It has become a sort
of fashion to laugh at things which they cannot understand
or to which they are not willing to devote much time. We
need not blindly shareinthe belief ancients had for sciences
of this kind, but what justification can we plead for reject-
ing them without a fair trial on our part to test their
truth. If a just verdict is to be returned, the large mass
of confusing evidence brought to bear upon this point
should be patiently sifted and carefully compared. Re-
cent scientific researches have shown that many of our
much abused customs and manners were the result of along
and careful study of sanitary or hygenic principles, and
not the arbitrary dicta of ignorant and self designing
priests. I shall touch on these facts elaborately in my
comprehensive treatise on Astrology, and show therein
that what we call “superstitious and meaningless ceremo-
nies and observances” were not mere conventionulities,
the result of social or priestly tyranny, but rules founded
upon human experience and scientific knowledge. There
are many questions which an astroléger is expected to
answer but which he does not or cannot answer. Because
a phenomenon cannot be intelligently explained with re-
ference to known scientific principles,would it be fairon
our part to reject italtogether. It might take generations
or centuries before we get a satisfactory solution for it.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 18] =====
4 INTRODUCTION.

Our ignorance of the causes working to produce a pheno-
menon, does not destroy the phenomenon itself; and in
these cases our duty issimple and plain. The first and the
most formidable question with which an astrologer is
generally assailed at the very threshold of his investiga-
tion is “how do the planets above influence the terrestrial
phenomena below?” and if they do “is it possible for man
to find out their exact influences?” Iam constrained to
admit that this question involves a good deal of discussion
before an attempt can be made to answer it, In searching
after scientific truths we need fear no discouragement.
Neither one man nor one age can perfecta science. It is
always progressing and such changes as lead to its prog-
ress must be noted down and their causes searched after.
Therefore any attempt, however humble it might be, made
to further its interests or explain its phenomena will not
be lost labour. ‘The obstacles may be very great indeed,
but they need not discourage the sincere student of science.
The question above referred to has three aspects in which
it can be viewed,viz (1) planetary influences on the physical
constitution of man, (2) planetary influences on his intel-
lectual peculiarities, and (3) planetary influences on his
success or failure in life. ‘These may be divided into
further sub-divisions, but itis not desirable to go deep into
those unnecessary details ina primer of this kind. Vedas
have been declared to be the oldest books now extant, and
almost allthe Vedic passages are capable of being inter-
preted to explainthe physical phenomena of the world.
After explaining the physical phenomena, Vedas goastep
further and deal with anobler phenomenon the intellect of
man, and its aims and objects with relation to its Creator.
It is not advisable to plunge deep into the metaphysical
side of this question and therefore avoiding all reference

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 19] =====
INTRODUCTION. 5

to it, I shall confino myself_as closely as possible to the
explanation of the physival phenomena. References to the
great physical agents, viz, light, heat, electricity, magne-
tism, gravitation, cohesion, adhesion and chemical combi-
nation are largely found in the Vedic passages and those
are fully explained in a treatise called the “ Soudamini
Kala,” a part of which is in the possession of a friend of
mine. These subjects have been most elaborately treated
in ourancient books,but unhappily in a symbolic language,
which is notgenerally understood by the ordinary Pundits,
and much less by the student who commences his Vedio
studies. I shall briefly explain some of the reasons which
go toshow that the physical constitutiwn of man is under
thedirect influence of the planets. In approachingscientific
subjects, we must be as little prejudiced as possible and
follow the reasoning carefully. This is a sublime subject
and requires a very calmand patient study. By a close
observation of our surroundings, we shall be able tu draw
some inferences which have a great scientific weight, and
the value of which depends considerably upon the mode
of our observation. All the planets shine by borrowed
light, and hence in their influences upon mankind they
considerbly differ as they take away something from the
Sun’s rays and add something of their own in the process
of reflection. Further on it will be shown, that influences
from different planets arerequired to develope the different
senses of the man. Quotations from the Vedas or
Soudaminikala are quite out of place here, and those who
are desirous to know more about these subjects are quite
welcome to open correspondence with me. Here I may
take this opportunity of assuring my readers, and others,
that on topics connected with this branch of,knowledge
T shall always be willing to explain objections, as far as

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 20] =====
6 INTRODUCTION,

Tam abletodoso. Just as the time of one rotation of the
Earth on its own axis constitutes a day, so also the time
of one revolution round the Sun wakes a year. ‘he dura-
tion of such years depend on the system of calculation,
but this will not be relevant to our point. The Earth turns
as well as the great luminary the Sun, and this double
rotation gives rise toall the complicated phenomena we
observe around us. In the body of the Sun itself we see
at intervals, vast dark spots, some of them many times
larger than the Earth we inhabit, appearing in several
places, sometimes moving regularly across the Sun’s disk,
sometimes disappearing rapidly in the spots they were
first noticed,sometimes receding from the body of the Sun
to tremendous distances, and then again falling apparen-
tly with great velocity upon the Sun’s surface. These
appearances and disappearances of the Sun-spots are not
withont their value in science and the reader will do well
to bear these facts in mind. Such phenomena are common
not only to the great luminary, but they may also be
noticed in the bodies of the other planets. ‘These dark
spots appear and disappear, on some occasions at regular
intervals, and on others apparently obeying no fixed laws.
The Sun is the chief source from which we get all our
light and heat, and the terrestrial phenomena is consider-
ably affected by the distribution of these two agencies.
‘The great natural forces of cohesion, adhesion, gravitation
and chemical affinity have an universal application, and
since these forces are constant and invariable, it is. not
reasonable to expect them to work continuously and yet
produce no results on the Earthly phenomena. If these
torces are universal,their inflaences must also be universal,
and when we once grant the proposition that they are
universal, the minutest atom in nature obeys them, as the

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 21] =====
INTRODUCTION, 7

largest compound brought into existance by the very same
forces working in a thousand wonderful ways. In the
theory of Evolution, it is a question, whether there re
any other forces than those already named, which have
been working to bring about the results therein named.
We cannot say that these forces or agencies have been
idle, that they have not evolved all the complex phenomena
out of the simpler materials, and that they have not pro-
duced the grandest triumph of their working viz the
formation of man with his most wonderful intellect. The
variety in human species as well as in the animals and
vegetables, is then the direct result of these forces wor-
king under certain laws which though general have still
their “Vagaries.” We have first, the grand divisions in
nature, vtz Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal possesing
distinct characteristics. These have been formed under
certain given physical conditions, subject of course to the
influences of the planetary rays.. The breaking of the
rocks, the work of the atmosphere on them, the power of
cold on the plants, the work of dew and frost, are all attri-
butable tothe rays of the Sun and Moon, and when they
have been doing so much work ,how can we say that these
kingdoms are not under their influences. These grand divi-
sionsare divided intonumberless genera,species,and indivi-
duals, and as they are brought into their present shape by
the above named forces, they cannot escape the universal
influence of the planetary rays. No two individuals in
nature are alike and this wonderful endless variety is due
to thousands of causes which have all been at work under
the controlling power of the Sun’s rays, and by studying
these causes alone, man will ever be able to predict their
character, existence, development, and final destruction.
No one can say that these are the results of blind chance

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 22] =====
8 INTRODUCTION.

working without purpose, and not being subjected to
superior controlling agencies from the planets. Wegetthem
from the enormous gaseous body called the Sun, and if
this is granted as it must be, we have his direct influence
on the minutest object in nature whether it is animate or
not.

Admitting that we are under the direct control of the
natural forces, we see that the Sun’s rays have a great
influence on our physique and character, because they de-
termine the climate of a place. ‘The principal factor in

_ the formation of climate is of course solar heat, the climate
of any place depending primarily on the lengths of the days
and nights, and on the relative duration of the seasons.
But climate is also greatly affected, by the nature of the
surface, whether it be land or water. Water parts with its
heat much more slowly than the land does, and it thus
retains a store, which serves to equalize the temperature.
On land again the climate depends to a very great extent
on the altitude. Climate isalso modified by winds which
transport heat and moisture from one place to another and.
by marine currents, Climate determines to a very large
extent the character of the animal and vegetable popu-
lation of a country or its fauna and its flora.” In studying
the history of any place we observe a great many vicissi-
tudes of climate, sometimes the area supporting a tropical
or sub-tropical vegetation and at other times offering a
congenial feeding ground for herds of various animals.
Such differences of climate may be partly accounted for by
alterations in the relative distribution of the masses of
land and water, but some of these changes appear so ex-
treme that geologists are not able to explain all the phe-
nomena satisfactorily, and we have to seek their explana-~
tion in astronomical causes. Astronomy therefore is able

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 23] =====
INTRODUCTION. 9

to explain all the terrestrial and celestial phenomena and
a study of this sublime science affords the greatest incen-
tive for the expansion of the human intellect. We have
seen that the Srn is a huge ball, around which all the
planets, as wellas the Earth revolve. We have also seen
that the surface of this huge body is spotted with dark
patches which appear dark in as much as they are less
luminous than the intensely bright surfaco which sur-
rounds them. These spots are neither constant in shape
nor in position, sometimes they are completely absent,
sometimes they slowly move across the disk,often in straight
lines, but occasionally they move also in curved lines.
Observations of these Sun-spots have established the fact
that the Sun is not a fixed body, around which the planets,
including the Kartb, revolve but that it has a motion of
its own through space. Even in the Suu-spots, the sur-
faces are not uniformally dark. ‘lhereare degrees of
darkness and these are believed to be gigantic cavities,
corresponding to different depths in the body of the Sun.
The coarse mottling of the Sun’s surface duo to irregu-
larities there, indicate lower levels where the spots are
dark, and it is natural to suppose that in these parts, light
islost by absorption through the over-lying atmosphere.
During total eclipses of the Sun by the shadow of the Moon
we see around the margin of the disk variously colored
prominences, and from these red flames of fantastical
shapes, may be seen darting forth to theextent of 1000r150
thousand miles or even to greater distances. ‘hese flames
generally consist of the gas hydrogen and it is a signifi-
cant fact, that this gas which forms so large a portion of
the water of the Earth, should also play such an important
part in the constitution of the Sun. The Sun is moro than
92 millions of miles from the Earth, and at this tremendous

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 24] =====
10 INTRODUCTION.

distance the effects of the Sun’s rays are so powerfal, that
all the terrestrial phenomena are attributed to their in-
fluence. Spectrum analysis hasshown the existence of a
large number of elements in the Sun, viz, hydrogen, iron,
zinc, magnesium, manganese, calcium, barium, lithium,
sodiam, nickel, copper, aluminiumetc. This list does not
exhaust the metallic and non-metallic elements found
therein, and when we refer to the composition of the
plants and animals on the surface of the Earth, we see
we have many of them, which at present seem to be in-
dispensible to their growth and production. The ele-
ments are, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, sulphur,
phosphorus, chlorine, iron, silica, manganese, magnesium,
calcium, sodium, and potassium. But we cannot say defi-
nitely that this list is exhaustive, for if it were so,. the
chemist can produce all the plants without the help of
Nature. We have not yet succeeded in ‘discovering and
analysing all the forces that are at work in the production
of plants, and this circumstance must impress upon our
minds the necessity of developing these sciences more and
more to meet all our objections. From the surface of the
Sun enormous quantities of light and heat are continually
being radiated in all directions. The Earth we inhabit,
on account of its insignificant size and tremendous dis-
tance from the Sun, can only receive but an extremely
small quantity of the total amount which is thus shed by
the great luminary. Calculations have shown that the
Earth receives less than the two thousand millionth part
of the total quantity of the Sun’s light and heat. All our
natural phenomena, which are entirely dependent upon
solor heat and light are threfore effected by this extremely
minute fraction of the Sun’s stores of energy. When the
huge globe we inhabit, with its inaccessible svow-clad

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 25] =====
INTRODUCTION. 11

mountains, impassable oceans, mighty rivers, grand forests,
and terrible seas of sand has been called into existence, and
is maintained in all its various phases by this infinitesimally
small quantity of the Sun’s energy, what should be the
fraction of the Sun’s light and heat, that would be required
to call into existance,any mineral, vegetable or animal body.
As the mass which makes a man is to the mass that forms
our globe so should be the proportion of the Sun’s light
and heat to call the individual body into form to the total
quantity of his energy necessary to maintain the globe at
the incredible distance of more than 92 millions of miles.
This quantity we have already represented by less than the
two thousand millionth part of the total quantity of the
Sun’s light and heat. Can we concieve what fraction of the
Earth a man is, and if we can, then, that fraction of the less
than the two thousand millionth part of the Sun’s energy
will be quite enough to bring an individual into existence,
and destroy him again. I shall here work a few figures
which show the extreme difficulty of conceiving this minute
atom of the Sun’s force, which is required to build up and
destroy an individual. The Earth sweeps round the Sun
on an orbit more than 180,000,000 miles in diameter and
the stars remain all but unchanged in their apparent
position. The Sun’s diameter is 850,000 miles. If the
Earth is represented in mass as J, the Sun’s mass is 318,000
times larger than the Earth. The volume of the Sun is
1,260,000 times larger than that of the Earth. At equal
distances, the Sun exerts 315,000 times as much force on
any body as the Earth. So that ifthe mass of the Earth
were as great as the Sun’s his dimensions remaining
unchanged an object which now weighs one 1d, would weigh
more than 32,480lbs. A man now of average weight would
be crushed down by a weight of more than 20,000 tons.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 26] =====
12 INTRODUCTION, °

A body if raised but one inch and than let fall would strike
the ground with a velocity three times as great as that of
the swiftest express train.

Let us take an example by which we may try to have
an idea of the inconcivable fraction of the Sun’s stores of
energy required to influence an individual and bring him
into existence. Fixing the population of the world roughly
at 2,000 millions, and supposing for one instance that the
Earth conteins no more mineral, vegetable or animal matter,
but is solely composed of human beings, then, we see that
the solar energy required for one man will be two thou-
sand millionth part of the minute fraction of the Sun’spower -

E : 1
thatthe Earth gets fromhim °° £500,000,000,000,000,000, 8
partof the Sun’s power radiated into space. We know
there are animal species, each division of which contains
millions and billions of individuals. ‘lake the number of
animals of all descriptions and say we have 1,000,000,000,
060. Thenthe Sun’s influence required for each indivi-
dual of this class will be less than the billionth part of the
fraction of the Sun’s power which the globe gets as its
share among the planets, which, as we have already seen,
is less than the two thousand millionth part of the whole
power radiated into space. Therefore each animal will
1
have to get less thang 495° 599,000,000,000,000 000 ५
part of the whole. In this case as in the preceding we
have to imagine for a moment that the Earth contains no
other than animal matter alone. Man must of course be
excluded from the animal species. ‘I'ake the birds of the
Earth and try to find out their number. We are of course
attempting to perform impossible things. Granting their
number, for the sake of simple calculation to be more than

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 27] =====
INTRODUCTION. 13

1,000,000 times the number of animals, and supposing
for a single moment that the Earth’s mass is com-
posed of bird matter alone, each individual bird gets one
millionth into one billionth part of the fraction of the
Sun’s rays viz. less than two thousand millionth part
1
°F ¥000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
the solar power. Go a step further and find out the number
of animalculz in the world. It seems to be more easy for
man to attempt to count the grains of sand in the sea than
to attempt to number the animalcule, when we remember,
that a drop of blood of the musk deer held by the point of a
fine needle contains millions of corpusles or living organisms.
Now reader if you can find out the number of plants onthe
surface of the Earth, and the number of fruits they bear,
Then each of the fruits will have that fraction of the solar
heat which is represented by their total number multiplied
by two thousand millions the fraction of the solar energy,
the Earth gets to produce its terrestrial phenomena. In
this case also we have to suppose that the Earth is solely -
composed of the vegetable matter But if we take the
number of molecules, forming our earthy compounds
mineral, vegetable and animal, and try to find out what
fraction of the solar energy is wanted for each object,
we have no mathematics which enables us to compre-
hend their value. It would, Iam afraid be more easy
for us to fly to the solar regions and compell the great
Juminary itself to give us some figures, consistent with
his inconvievable colossal magnitude and power than to
attempt to figure to ourselves these fractions of fractions,
until we are lost in the wondrous regions of numbers.
Our imagination recoils in attempting this impossible task
and reason goes mad to solve an insolvable problem,

th ‘fraction of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 28] =====
14 INTRODUCTION.

Imagine now what will be the proportion of the mass of
an iudividual, to the mass of the globe, and see if it is
possible to find out the fraction of the Sun’s influence that
is needed to call it into existence and destroy it again for
redistribution in nature.

Gravitation is not confined to the Earth, but is exerted
in various degrees by every mass of matter in the Universe.
‘When two bodies attract each other the greater the matter
the greater is the intensity of the attractive force. The
Sun is a gigantic mass of matter and attracts all bodies
which move round it. Astronomers have discovered
more than 180 planets, which thus revolve roand the Sun

but by far the greater number are smalland insignificant.
8 of them are large planets of which our Earth is one,

and as our observations are made to see the planetary in-
fluences upon the terrestrial phenomena, we are principally
concerned with the remaining seven which the ancients had
already marked by significant names. All these planets
are retained in their orbits by their gravitation towards
the Sun which as already explained forms the great centre
of the planetary system. Every thing upon the Earth’s
surface is subjected to terrestrial gravity but the other
components of the Universe also exercise their attraction
upon us. The origen, development and decay of compounds
must therefore be determined by the balance of all these
forces or attractions. The rotation of the Earth combined
with the attraction of the ocean by the Sun and Moon,
gives rise to tidal waves. I have tried to show. above that
all the phenomena of life is chiefly due to the Sun and
my statements have been those that are of universal accep-
tance, because they have all been taken from scientific
works. Without the Sun therefore, there could neither
be rain nor springs nor rivers nor oceans. Rains are depen-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 29] =====
IN'TRODUCTION. , 15

dent for distribution upon currents in the atmosphere
and these are due to disturbances of eqnilibriam brought
by means of solar heat. If there had been no Sun there
could have been no winds. The Sun has been shown to
be the real agent in the formation of ocean currents. So
far as we know of vegetable or animal life, we see its
manifestation entirely due to solar heat and” light. In
fact the great changes experienced at. different periods
of the world’s history whether natural, political; social
religious or intellectual are entirely due to our varying
relations with the glorious body with which every one
of us is familiar, but about whose tremendous influence
onthe globe the greater we try to know the greater
remains for us to know. It requires therefore no high -
stretch of imagination to conceive that our physical con-
stitution is under the direct influence of the Sun. When
the globe we inhabit is under the direct influence of the
Sun,and here we bave to remember that only a very
minute fraction of the Sun’s light and heat has been shown
to have worked all the terrestrial phenomena, how can we
say thatthe individual body, be it mineral, vegetable
oranimal is not under the direct influence of the all power-
ful raysof the same great luminary. When the globe itself
is formed into its present shape by an infinitismally small
quantity of the Sun’s power, it does not require a very
high order of intellect to comprehend that the individual
bodies composing the globe must also have been brought
into existence by the smallest conceivable power from the
same wonderful body called the Sun. It seems almost in-
credible that persons living on the Earth, should ever be
able tolearn anything about the chemical constitution of
the Sun, which by the roughest calculation is more than
92 millions of miles removed from us; but such has been

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 30] =====
16 INTRODUCTION.

the powae of the intellect of man that the most wonder-
fully difficult laws of the Universe have been brought with-
in its knowledge and elaborately treated after a series of
indisputable observations. ‘hose who have known some
thing of yases and their tremendous powers under certain
given physical conditions will readily agree with me,
when I say that owing their origen to the rays cf the Sun,
they have not been idling their time in the Universe, but `
that they have been doing it most incomprehensively,.
There are gases a single breath of which will kill a man
instantaneously, and there are others, which when brought
into contact with each other in the smallest quantities
imaginable blow up not only ordinary structures but
break the most hardy rocks in twain, With so many forces
at constant work, we are not ina position to assert
dogmatically, that we remain unaffected by them, and that
their powers have been lost upon us. The Sun’s rays ac-
ting upon the watery surfaces convert water into vapour,
vapour rises into the atmosphere and is there condensed
by means of coid blasts of wind, and falls down as dew
and rain, rain supports vegetation and vegetation sustains
man. Manis the creature of circumstances and wherever
he is placed, he readily adapts himself to his surroun-
dings. It is plain therefore that he is influenced by them.
A man exposed to the morning rays of the Sun gets soon
bilious. We see here that there is some mysterious
power in the morning rays which act on the biliary ducts
in man. A person exposed to the midday rays not
only finds that he has lost water by means of free perspi-
ration but also feels very thirsty. We feel exhilirated on
fine mornings and dejected on gloomy ones. One ex-
posed to the evening rays of the Sun grows healthy
instead of bilious. Tho rays therefore undergo a remar-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 31] =====
INTRODUCTION. 17

kable change when the Sun travels in the sky. The che-
mical effects of the refracted rays are considerably diffe-
rent under different circumstances and on different subs-
tances at different times. The calculations above given
have already shown the minuteness of the Sun’s power
that would be required to effect changes in the composi-
tion of the individual object whether vegetable or animal.
Every object in nature offers its surface to the action of the
Sun’s light and heat,and theircombined action is so power-
ful upon the smallest living or dead organism, that the
changes effected therein havo the same bearing on the com-
bination and redistribution of the atoms as they have in
the mightiest animals. ‘These atoms enter into an infinite
series of combinations, forming parts of organized bodies
vegetable or animal and atter discharging their respective
functions, they are thrown off again, mixing with the air,
the soil, or other organised matter, and again and again
running through these rounds of physical combinations.
The constituent atoms of matter are thus constantly per-
forming their circles of duties in the economy of nature,
with infinitely more certainty and regularity than is
observed in the best disciplined army or the most regulated
Government. Tho minuteness of some of these organisms,
animal or vegetable,or mineral may be noticed here,so that
we can see at a glance,that the most inconceivable fraction
of the Sun’s light and heat is enough to work the greatest
wonders. When a body is subjected to,the action of heat or
lightits elementsare readily decomposed and its constituent
particles separatod so that many of them eombine with
other particles of matter and form new substances possess-
ing altogether different properties. The microscopic
researches have disclosed most surprising examples of the
minuteness of which organised matter is susceptible.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 32] =====
18 ENTRODUCTION,

That many species of infusoria are so small that millions
of them collected into one mass would not exceed the bulk
of a grain of sand, and thata thousand of them might
swim side by side through the eye of a fine needle. In
the slate found in Bohemia, which consists almost entirely
of these shells a cubic inch contains 41,000,000,000, a
cubic inch of this weighs 220 grains of sand, and one
grain therefore contains one hundred and eighty six
millions, and that therefore each of these would weigh
हतत of a grain.

A thread of spider’s web four’ miles long weighs little
more than a grain, and it has been ascertained that this
thread consists of 6000 filaments. The diameter of the

red particles in the human blood is

 

8 rept part of an inch,

and in some species of animals it is hardly tyythpartof

an inch. Ifa drop of the blood of the muskdeer be snspen-
ded from the point of a fine needle,it would contain about
120,000,000 corpuscles. Microscopic researches have disclo-
sed the existence of animals, which are inferior in magni-
tude to the globules of blood; and yet each of these living
organisms is composed of members as admirably suited toits
mode of life as that of the largest animal. Their motions
display all the phenomena of life, sense and instinct.
They move with the most surprising speed and agility,
their motions and actions are not blind and fortuitous, and
they are evidently governed by choice and directed to an
end. Since they eat and drink, necessary for their exis-
tence,they must have been supplied with a digestive appa-
ratus,and their muscular power far exceeds the strength
and flexibility, relatively speaking, of the larger species.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 33] =====
INTRODUCTION, 19

These are susceptible of the same appetites, and obnoxious
to the same passions, as the superior animals, and though
differing in degree, the satisfaction of these desires soems
to be attended with the same results. A soap bubble
floating in the light of the Sun reflects to the eye au endless
variety of the most gorgeous tints of color, and each of these
tints therefore must correspond to a certain thickness cf
the substance forming the bubble, and it has been shown
by experiment, that almost all transparent substances,
when reduced to a certain degree of tenuity would reflect
these colors. At the highest point of the bubble, before
it bursts, is observed a black spot which reflects no color.
The thickness at this point is the 2,500,000th part of an
inch. The bubble at this point possesses the properties
of water as essentially as does the ocean that surrounds
us, and consequently the ultimate molecules forming water
must have less dimensions than this thickness. A mile of
platinum wirewould not weigh more than a grain of sand.
If a piece of marble be reduced to a fine powder by grind-
‘ing, and purified by careful washing, its particles, when
examined by a powerful microscope will be found to consist
of blocks having rhomboidal forms, and angles as perfect
and as accurate, as the finest specimens of calcareous spars.
Even when the process of pulverization is pushed to the ut-
most practical limits, it is still found that the same forms
are reproduced. A grain of musk will impregnate the
the atmosphere of a room, with its scent, for twenty years
or more without suffering any appreciable loss in its weight,
consequently every particle of the atmosphere which
produces the sense of the odour must contain a certain
quantity of the musk. I can adduce further illustrations
of the extreme minuteness of the atoms which under the
action of the Sun’s light and heat, have been producing

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 34] =====
20 INTRODUCTION.

all the terrestrial phenomena, Here the work of the
Sun’s rays is well defined and directed towards the
accomplishment of acertain object. How then can we
say that our bodies are not under the influence of the all
powerful rays of the Sun? when the smallest animalcula,
are under his direct control, and exhibit the phenomena
of lifeas we have been doing. We can plainly see the
solar rays falling on the sain, warming it, and affecting
thereby our sense of touch, they illuminate it, and affect
our sense of vision, they tan it, but the effect is not
directly cognisable by any sense we possess though in-
directly sensible both to sense and touch. In this way
the different senses of the human body are created, deve-
loped, sustained and destroyed by means of the solar rays
which not only act directly on our bodies,but also indirect.
ly affect them by means of reflection from the surfaces of the
other planets, which as we know shine by borrowed light
from the Sun. Gravitation is not confined tothe Earth,
but is exerted in various degrees by every mass of matter
in the Universe. When two bodies attract each other the
greater the mass the greater is the attractive force ; and
gravitation varies inversely as the square of the distance.
The Earth is completely subject to the Sun’s attraction,
and consequently every atom in it however minute it
might be in magnitude. MThe.Sun isa gigantic mass of
matter and attracts all the bodies which move round it.
Astronomers have discovered more than 180 planets,
which thus revolve round the Sun, but by far the greater
number are small and insignificant. 8 of them are
large planets, of which our Earth is one, and as our
observations are made to see the: influences exerted upon
us by the other planets, we are principally concerned with
the remaining seven which the ancients had already

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 35] =====
INTRODUCTION. ` {4 21

marked by significant nares. All these planets are re-
tained in their orbits by gravitation towards the Sun,
which as has already been explained forms the centre of
our pianetary system. TheSua not only draws all the cos-
mical materials towards himself but also imparts to then
tremendous velocities, the greater the distance from which
they come greater is the velocity he imparts tothem. In
their onward course they are subject te the influence of
the other planets, the patrols of the solar system, and un-
der such disturbing influences they must necessarily be
compelled to follow either temporarily or permanently the
directions indicated by the combined influences. In this
continual rush of matter, this constant interchange of
attendants it is possible to recognize the progress of pro-
cesses, exercising the most potent influence on the wel-
fare of the terrestrial phenomena. It is also probable that
the bodies which are finally drawn into the solar domain
perform highly important functions in the economy of our
nature. Wehave seen that everything on the surface
of the Earth is subject to terrestrial gravity but the
other components of the Universe have also been shown
to exercise their attraction upon us. The creation, deve-
lopment and decay of all compounds must therefore be de-
termined by the balance of these forces or attractions. I
have tried to show above that all the phenomena of life
are entirely duc to the Sun’s influence which is also part-
ly reflected by the other planets. Without the Sun there-
fore their could neither be rain, nor springs, nor rivers
ner oceans. Rains are dependent for distribution upon
currents in the atmosphere, and these are due to distur-
bances of equilibrium brought about by means of solar
heat. If there had been no Sun there could have been no
winds. The Sun has been shown to b> the real agent in

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 36] =====
22 INTRODUCTION,

the formation of ocean currents Sv far as we know of ve-
getable or animal life, we see its manifestation entirely
due to the solar heat and light. In fact the great chan-
ges experienced at different periods of the world’s history
whether natural, political, social, religious ov intellectual
are entirely due to our varying relations with the glori-
ous plauet with which every one of us is familiar but about
whose tremendous influence on the globe,the greater we try
to knuw the greater remains for us to know. It requires
therefore uo considerable stretch of imagination to con-
ceive that our physical constitution is under the direct
influence of the Sun,

When the globe itself has been formed into its pre-
sent shape by an infinitismally small quantity of the Sun’s
power it does not require a very high order of intellect to
comprehend that the individuals composing the globe -
must also have been brought into existence by the smallest
conceivable power from the same self lumiuous body called
the Suu. Itseems almost incredible that persons living
on the Earth should ever be able to learn anything about
the chemical constitution of the Sun, which by the rough-
est calculation is more than 92 millions of miles removed
from us, but such has been the intellect of man in past
as at present and certainly will be in future too, that the
most intricate and difficult laws of the Uuiverse, have been
brought within its knowledge, and elaborately explained
after a long series of indisputable observations. Those
who have studied ,the nature of gases, for all matter
can be reduced into this state by the action of the Sun’s
rays, and their tremendous influences under certain given
physical conditions, will readily agree with me when I say,
that, owing their origen to the light and heat radiated by
the Sun, they have not been idling their time in the Uni-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 37] =====
INTIODUCTION, 25

verse, but that they have their work to do, and they have
been doing it most incomprehensively. There are gases a
single breath of which will kill a man instantly, while
there are others which when brought in chemical contract
with each other in ths smullest quantities, blow up not
only ordinary structures but also break the most hardy
rocks in twain. With so many forces at constant work
under the influence of the Sun’s rays we are not ina
position to assert dogmatically that we are not affected by
them and that their influences have been lost upon us.
Recent scientific researches have strikingly shown us
that in all terrestrial phenomena, we see the action of a
certain proportion of the Sun force. One of the greatest mo-
dern astronomers thus writes upon the Sun’s influence on
the Earth by phenomena. ‘‘The Sun’s rays are the ultimate
source of almost every motion which takes plave on the
surface of the Earth. By its heat are produced all winds,
and those disturbances in the electric equilibrium of the
atmosphero which give rise to the phenomena of lightning,
and probably also to terrestrial action and the aurora. By
their vivifying action vegetables are enabled to draw sup-
port from inorganic matter and become in their turn
support of animals and man; and the source of those
deposits of dynamical efficiency which are laid up for
human use in our coal strata. By them the waters of
the sea are made to circulate in vapour through the air,
and irrigate the land, producing springs and rivers. By
them are produced all disturbances of the chemical
equilibrium of the elements of nature, which by a
series of compositions and decompositions give rise to
new products and originate a transfer of materials. Even
the slow degradation of the solid constituents of the sur-
face in which its chief geological change consists is

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 38] =====
2b INTRUDUCTION,

almost entirely due on the one han to the abrasion of
wind or rain and the alteration of heat and frost, on the
other to the continual beating of sea waves agitated by
winds the results of solar radiation. The effect of oceanic
currents (mainly originating in that influence) though
slight in abrasion is powerful in diffusing and transporting
the matter abraded, and when we consider the immense
transfer of matter so produced, the increase of pressure
over large spaces in the bed of the ocean and the diminu-
tion over corresponding portions of the land, we are not
at a loss to percieve, how the elastic force of subterranean
fires thus repressed on the one hand and released on the
other may break forth in points where the resistance is
barely adequate to their retention and thus bring the phe-
nomena of even volcanic activity under the general law of
solar influence.” The: amount of solar heat received per
hour at noon under the equator would melt 390,000,000,000
tons of ice. Expressing the same result by another method
we might say that the Sun’s heat received during one year
would be able to heat an ocean of fresh water sixty miles
deep from the temperature of melting ice to the boiling
point. Yet this enormous annual supply of heat is but
the 1—2,138,000,000th part of that which the Sun actu-
ally radiates into space in the course of a single year.

Man is the creature of circumstances and wherever he
is placed he readily adapts himself to his surroundings.
It is plain therefore he is influenced by them. A person
exposed to the rays of the morning Sun gets soon bilious.
We see here that there is same mysterious power in the
morning rays which acts on the biliary ducts. A person
exposed to the midday rays not only finds that he has
lost water by means of free perspiration but also feels, as
a matter of course, very thirsty. On fine mornings we

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 39] =====
(4) INTRODUCTION. 25

feel exhilirated, while on gloomy days, we feel dejected or
out of tune as it were to apply ourselves to any serious men-
tal or physical work. Evening rays are said to be health-
giving, and such sensations of pain or pleasure, cannot
therefore be said to be due to no influences from the Sun.
Pleasant moonlight acts powerfully on our minds and
makes us happy. The Negroes of Africa owe their thick
lips, ugly forms and curled stout hairs to the influence of
the Sun’s rays, as do the fair creatures of the North of
Europe, their fine forms, regular features and inviting
looks. The Patagonian owes his tall body to the solar
rays as does the pigmy his stunted form. Fruits get
racy by exposure to light and flowers blossom under simi-
lar influences. All these facts have their scientific
place and value. Food, clothing, climate, seed and other
surroundings determine the character of not only the man
but also of the animal. We thus see that we are incessantly
acted upon by the invisible and inconcievable forces that
surround us, and when we say that we are under their
influences we do not require the readers to believe any-
thing more thau they actually see and feel.

I now proceed to show the influence of the planets on
man’s intellectual peculiarities. This is a very important
subject and volumes might be written in its elucidation. I
have here neither time nor space to devote much toits expla-
nation but the Introduction would not be complete without
a few observations on this all absorbing subject. It is not
only a very important subject, but it is also a very
difficult one to treat. Without entering into the niceties of
psychology in its definition of mind and matter,we all know
that our mind is different from our body. The distinction is
broad enough and is easily understood in a general way
by all men of ordinary abilities. If mind is to be accepted

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 40] =====
26 INTRODUCTION.

as a something, which is not the result of our birth, bree-
ding, education and surroundings, then we have to credit
its presence in our bodies to some Unknown Hand to which
we ure quite welcome to give any dignified name as God,
Nature, etc ; but if on the other hand we have to consider
our ‘will’ as the result of birth, breeding, education and
surroundings, we can easily trace its work to the circum-
stances under which it has been called into existence. This
I admit is a very difficult problem to solve and I had better
leave it to abler heads. I shail here however confine myself
to its workings so far as we can trace them through our
bodies and directly under the control of the nervous sys-
tem. Brain is the seat of sensation and feeling, and these
sensations and feelings are centred there by means of ex-
ternal impressions conveyed to it through the nervous
system, which has its principal seat in the head and from
which springs the Spinal-Column which distributes its net- |
work of channels throughout the human body. In animals
sexual union, with few exceptions, has been considered
indispensable for the propogation of their species. In man
it is found to be absolutely necessary. Whatever may be
the process for the formation of the vital essence in parents
one thing is certain, viz.that without food and nourishment,
the human body never acquires this active principle of
propogating its species. After coapalation and impregna-
tion, the mother requires generally more nourishment and
delicate treatment than when she was not pregnant. It
is therefore clear, that food, climate and other physical
conditions are necessary for the development of the young
foetus. Without entering into the details of such develop-
ment which are beautifully sketched out in the astrologi-
cal works, and which is irrelevant for our present pur-
poses, we know that after a certain stage of growth in the

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 41] =====
INTRODUCTION. 27

womb of the female, the infant is thrown out by internal
forces and it sees for the first time the light of the Sun.
Henceforward the mysterious bond of union which served
to meet all the demands of nature, while the babe was in
the womb, is now severed and the infant will have to be
cared for as any other object weich has @ separate indivi-
dual existence. It is very material therefore to see where the
child is born, for much of its success in future generally de-
pends upon its surroundings in ‘the commencement. As its
mother and father were under the direct influence of the
Sun, as it had to be fed through the maternal channels
since the commencement, and as it is now under the di-
rect influence of the solar rays, the babe even before its
birth, experienced the effects of the planetary influences.
At the time of its birth we see in it the rudiments of an
undeveloped brain, ready to receive external impressions
through the senses 4nd store them in the brain cells for
its future use. While the Soul has been placed by astro-
logers under the direct influence of the Sun the mind has
been credited to the influence of the Moon. It is stated
by scientists that as the Moon is nearer to us than the
Sun, the influence of her rays is greater than that of the
rays of the Sun. But the Moon borrows her light from
the Sun and therefore can only produce such effects, as
are attributed to the rays of.the Sun, with this difference
that as she has the power of reflecting the Sun’s rays she

does so with considerable change in their chemical effects.
The air is the same all over the world, but as it is consider-

ably affected by thecontact of local objects, so also are the
rays of the Sun by theircontact with other bodies. They give
something of their own and take something from the bodies
with which they come in contact. When they are refracted
the spectra of light contain seven different colors, which

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 42] =====
28 INTRODUCTION.

not only bear no resemblance to the white light, which we
see around us, but also possess great differences in their
heating and chemical effects. The seven colors into which
light.is broken are represented by ashort formula whichcan
easily be remembered by the student, and every letter of
which stands for the name of a color which begins with
it. Vibgyor contains 7 letters, V stands for violet, I for
indigo, B for blue, G for green, Y for yellow, O for orange
and & forred. The violet rays are the most refrargible,
while the red rays are the least refrangible. The heating
power of the refracted rays seems to bediminished towards
the violet while they increase towards the red end; and
hence it is probable that red objects, which absorb all
other than the red rays, heat our visual organs consider-
ably and affect them, on the other hand green objects re-
fresh the eyes and strengthen them. Because at the green
part of the band the effects of the two extremes seem
to be perfectly neutralised. Nor are the heating and
chemical effects of the rays confined to the visible spec-
trum, but extend far beyond the colors. The greatest
heat is felt beyond the red rays, after which we see no
bright colors but dark bands. Therefore the solar rays
besides illuminating and heating substances on which they
fall, produce considerable changes in the appearances
and constitution of many substances. ‘Ihe real nature of
this action is not yet clearly understood by the modern
chemist, but the observed results are modifications of the
chemical condition of the substances acted upon. “It is
worthy of notice however” remarks a great scientist
“that we have a sense by which the action of the longer
light waves corresponding to the red end, and the parts
beyond the red end of the spectrum is recognized by us,
and another sense enabling us to recognise the action of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 43] =====
INTRODUCTION. 29

medium waves corresponding tothe yellow part of tho
spectrum, and in gradually diminishing the waves corres-
ponding to parts up to the red end on one side and the
violet end on the other side, but we have no sense ena-
bling us to recognise directly the action of the shorter
waves corresponding to parts of the spectrum beyond the
violet end. Isit not conceivable that some creatures
even among terrestrial beings may possess a sense,
enabling them to recognise the action of these short
waves and that such a sense may give them powers as
distinct from the powers we possess in virtue of the senses
of touch and of sight, as the sense of sight is distinct
from the sense of touch? A man born blind may not be
more incapable of conceiving the nature of the sense of
sight and of the powers it confers tpon those who possess
it, than those who have all the five senses are of the
powers which may be actually possessed by creatures
having organs suited to appreciate the action of the
‘shorter light-waves.” The soul is considered higher by
the philosophers and religionists of all ages and countries
than the mind or will and soul-strengthning rays can
only come from the Sun who is by universal consent,
placed at the head of the planetary system. We have
seen by experience that idicts and lunatics are considerbly
affected on new Moon and full Moon days, more sd on
full Moon than on new Moon days. If we take a small
needle and bring it before a magnet we see an invisible
cause of motion on the part of the needle towards the
magnet. We know the effect but not the cause, we call
it magnetism but we'do not know why that phenomenon is
produced. In the same way by the combination or con-
tact of certain substances we see a force generated which
we call electricity. Our nervous currents are identified

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 44] =====
30 INTRODUCTION,

with electrical currents and the greater the nervous
energy the greater the will force or strength of mind.
Weak men have weak minds while strong men have strong
minds. A sound mind in a sound body says the proverb.
Here the word sound or strong will have to be interpreted
with reference to nervous energy. It is not the quantity
of flesh in the body that makes a man really useful or
courageous, but it is the quantity and quality of the brain
aud the nervous system, that make the great man he is.
We have’ seen that the rudiments of the brain in the in-
fant are constantly under the influence of the external as
well as internal forces, which owe their origen and existence
totheinfluencecf{theSun’s rays. Themind therefore takes
its strength or weakness from the influence of the planets.
Shall we say that the human mind is not affected by the
sunstroke, mirages, heated atmosphere and poisonous
gases in swampy and damp places? shall we affirm with
any show of sense that it is not affected by the luxuriant
growth of the tropical vegetation and the stunted shrub-
bery of the frigid regions? Shall we say that the mighty
rivers, the seas of sand, the exhibition of vitality among
the lowest forms of insects, the storing of eletrical cur-
rents among the marine animals, the great virtues of the
medical herbs, the powers of the plantsand animals in
the selection and assimilation of their food, and the
convulsions of the Earth, with their rapid motions, some-
times from one end to the other, sometimes confined to
narrow areas, have no traces upon the human intellect
and do not in the least affect our mind. He will bea
grand sceptic indeed who can boldly affirm that his mind
is not affected by the surrounding nature and its constant
work. That our mind is fully affected by the external
forces is richly illustrated by the mental varieties exhibi-

|

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 45] =====
INTRODUCTION. 31

ted by the different types of mankind. The formation of
the brain matter depends on the past and present condi-
tions of life and as these differ in different countries, we
came across a great variety of intellectual phenomena
which otherwise would be simply inexplicable. Europeans
living in tropical climates exhibit a change in their intel-
lect in the short space of two or three generations. Ne-
groes living in temperate Zones do the same and we
can quote lots of examples, wherein the brain of man by
change in food, clothing and climate has undergone ma-
terial alterations, in some cases showing signs of clear de-
terioration and in others perceptible progression. How
are we to account for this strange phenomena in the
human intellect! Are we to suppose that these pheno-
mena are not effected by the light and heat we get from
the Sun? How can we account for these changes, if not
by the influences from the Sun. Whenthe Earth is it-
self formed into its present shape by the solar rays, what
logical argument could we adduce to prove that the
bodies on the face of the Earth are not affected for good
or bad by those universal forces. We have seen that
slight variations in the thermometer produce happiness or
misery to thousands or millions of people. A trifling
change in the weather brings on neuralgia, headache,
bronchitis, sore eyes, fever, small pox, cholera, dysentry,
and a host of other diseases and when persons are affec-
ted by them by the change of weather through solar
causes, shall we say that their minds remain intaet and
thereby escape the effect of these influences. We had
influenza sweeping all over the world and carrying away
hundreds and thousands of people and can we safely say
that it produced no change in our minds and affected none
of our relations in the world, Can we say that similar

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 46] =====
32 INTRODUCTION.

visitations are not the results of changes in climate
brought about by the solar rays? Some years ago the
solar light from being pure white exhibited a strange phe-
nomenon and appeared yellowish. I may not be correct in
attributing the prevalence of the influenza tothe change
thus effected in the solar rays then, but who can say that
such changes in the composition of the Sun’s light pro-
duced no results immediate or remote on the flora and the
fauna of the country where it prevailed. In by-gone
ages we had similar visitations. The Black Death in Eu-
rope in the middle ages was a notorious example of this
kind. The wars prevalent show a similar influence.
Statesmen may remain calculating, kings may be unwill-
ing to enter the battle field but a sudden madness seizes
the nation and the standard of rebellion is raised and
millions of people enter the arena with death floating
before their eyes, and for months or years they go on kil-
ling and murdering each other, as if they had nothing
nobler to engage their attention. We may call it the age
of rebellion, war, or pestilence or anything we please;but
how can we account for such occurrences unless the com-
bined action of certain planets influence the brains of
people ina particular locality,or state or country and makes
them rush on a work which generally ends in their utter
ruin andthe distress of their numerous families. Not
only villages and towns are ruined in this way but nations
have ceased to exist and their names have been erased
from the pages of the world’s history. We know that the
quantity and the quality of the brain determine the men-
tal calibre of each individual and these will be developed
under the influence of the solar rays. I dont mean to say
that I have exhausted the grounds on which I base my
opinion but I have thrown several suggestions which if

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 47] =====
(5) INTRODUCTION. 33

carefully investigated will give us much food and perhaps
might give us better insight into the truths of astrological
formulas than we possess at present. I shall here quote
one or two remarks from eminent writers which illustrate
the truth of my remarks about the effects of climate and
food on the mind of man. Reffering to the Bengalis
a writer says. “Living on rice in a hot steamy climate
they are physically one of the weakest races in India.
They are however industrious and intellectually occupy
the foremost rank. One peculiarity about their dress
is that they generally go bareheaded,”  ‘‘From their
climate and food, the peopie (Beharese) are taller and
stronger than the Bengalis.” Here the writer admits
that they are intellectually inferior to the Bengalis, The
development of the brain therefore depends entirely on
the influences exerted upon it both before and after birth
by the great planets which go on moving continually
round the Sun. If on the other hand, we grant that
there is a seperate thing called “mind or will” not the
result of these forces working on-the body through the
senses, but implanted in it by a Higher Power, it is very
difficult for us to suppose that even such a thing, could
remain unaffected by the surrounding body which holds it,
aud which is entirely subjected to the several influences
already enumerated in the preceding pages. In either
case it must be granted that the intellect of man is direct-
ly affected by the surrounding influences. We know by
science that magnetism and electricity which have been
playing such important parts iu the formation and des-
truction of the terrestrial phenomena, come directly from
the Sun,through his rays,and when the latter are refracted,
their chemical effects must necessarily be different in the
different parts of the human system, The Sun is considered

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 48] =====
84 INTRODUCTION.

to be very powerful on new Moon days, and a reference to
the world’s history will tell us that the greatest men have
generally died before new Moon days- In spite of the

difficulties which surround the position of an ordinary :
man he can rise above them by a large store of nervous

energy or will force. The biographies of great men give

us ample proof of this statemenet. They were born under

a favourable conjunction of the planets, and their mental

energies due to such influences, raised them‘far above

their fellow creatures.

In a forest we see some trees growing tall and ma-
jestic while others almost springing in the very same
beds showing all the symptoms of decay and stunted
growth. Here the reasons for these marked changes are
not clear and no amount of botanical knowledge will enable
us to trace it to their final causes, Previous causes, which
have been at work inthe spot must be satisfactorily ex-

' plained before we can make an attempt to unravel the
mysteries of this apparent deviation from a general law. In
a field whicl is carefully ploughed, manured and watered,
we see the same marked differences certainly not attribu-
table to defects in cultivation or weakness in the seed but
to somthing else wich the scientist has not yet explored.
In the same way forces miuute to a degree produce won-
derful differences in nature and these must be determined
carefully before we can account for the variety we witness
in this world. Astrology says that the mind of man is
under the control of the Moon. The slightest obliquity
in her rays with other inflaences favouring or countract-
ing them produces great and perceptible changes in the
mind of man and the art by which we calculate these
previous forces under a symbolic language constitutes the
subject proper of astrology. The determination of the ob-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 49] =====
INTRODUCTION. ` 35

liquity of the rays of the different planets expressed in the
symbolic language of quadrants, trienes &c. enables the
adept in this science to predict with certainty how they
work out their results and what effects they produce upon
thechild. Itis notthe time of birth alone that needs to be
taken into consideration, but the influences of the planets
as they move along from day to day, from month to month
and from year to year must also be recorded. The combi-
nations and permutations of these planets, Zodiacal signs,
their divisions and sub-divisions and the Constellations of
stars produce an endless variety in the life of man and if
properly worked out can satisfactorily account for all the
terrestrial and celestial phenomena by which we are sur-
roucded. The seed is prepared under the influence of the
Sun, the bed is prepared under the same influence and
the child before and after its birth is placed under the
same all pervading influence. The mind, whether it be the
result of education and circumstances or implanted in the
human body by an Unknown and an Unknowable hand,
must necessarily partake of the nature ofits surroundings
and be affected considerably by them. The intellectual pe-
culiarities of man, therefore, are the direct result of the ac-
tion of the Sun’s rays. We have yet to consider how planets
affect our success and failure in life. We know that the Sun
is the fountain head from which we get all our electricity
and magnetism. Our nervous currents have been shown to
be identified with electrical currents. Electricity is divided
into two kinds, positive and negative. Electricities of the
same kind repel each other while electricities of the oppo-
site nature attract each other. This can easily be illustrated
by a simple experiment. If two substances, silver and
sulphuric acid are brought into contact with each othera
force is generated which can be induced to a small ball

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 50] =====
36 INTRODUCTION.

by means of a wire, Similarly electrify another nicely ba-
Janced ball with the same kind of electricity and bring
the two balls together. The two balls repel each other
and fly apart. Now instead of silver, dip zinc, we get
another force of a similar nature, but exhibiting different
proprities and the two balls electrified by means of this pro-
cess show an inclination not to meet each other but to fly
away from each other as did the first set of balls. But if
we bring a ball of the first electricity close tu a ball of the
second electricity, wé at once observe a marked change
in their behaviour. Instead of flying away from each
other they attract one another, and remain in contact, un-
til we seperate them with a little force.

Here we observe certain laws. Electricity generated by
the contact of silver with sulphuric acid differs from elec-
tricity derived from zinc and sulphuric acid. The first
kind of electricity is called Positive or North, and the
second is called Negative or South electricity. Electricities
of the same kind repel each other while electricities of the
opposite kind attract each other. In the Universe there
is no object which is not pervaded by this great Physical
agent called electricity and in all objects whether ani-
mated or not we see positive and negative electricities
combining together, only with this difference that the
quantities of these two kinds of electricities are not equal
and constant. There is also another fact in this connec-
tion which is worthy of notice and that is that in na-
ture under certain pliysical conditions which have not
been clearly understood by scientists, these two kinds
of electricities suddenly change their sides and exhibit
altogether different phenomena. ‘For the sake of conve-
nience, we must call these objects positively or negatively
electrified bodies as positive or negative electricity pre-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 51] =====
INTRODUCTION. 37
ponderates in them.

I have already stated that our nervous currents do
nothing more than carry these electrical currents, they
are identified with them and thus become the most impor-
tant factors in the constitution of man. For man could
do or say nothing without bringing into play those electri-
calcurrents. It remains for me to show how these affect
our prospects in life, and make us successful or unsuccess-
ful men. Our constitution is the result of our birth, breed-
ing, climate and food, and these must affect the nervous
system for good or bad. Apart from the strength of the
seed that is sown in the soil, whose nature must also
considerably affect its growth, other circumstances like
ploughing, watering, manuriag, exposure to heat and
light must also be taken into consideration in the determi-
nation of its produce. Inthe same manner the nervous
energy of the father and mother, the climate of the place
the effects of food, clothing and various other causes deter-
mine the predominance of the positive or negative elec-
tricities in the constitution of the child born. Some places
have peculiar powers of storing large quantities of positive
or negative electricities and this is most remarkably seen
in the virtues of certain plants, which on particular days,
acquire this power cf storing electrical currents to a very
large extent. It is easy for us to call things absurd, which
we cannot understand or explain, but it is not so easy
to devote ourtime and energy to its study and explanation.
It is very commonly believed by almost all the nations of
the world, both in ancient and modern times, that certain
herbs when picked upon particular days, have great
medicinal virtues or some magical efficacy. The last
word means nothing more than that the virtue of the plant
picked up under certain conditions performs wonders

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 52] =====
38 INTRODUCTION.

which could not have been achieved without its help.
Among the Hindus, the new Moon days falling on Sundays,
are considered to be specially favourable for picking up
of sonse herbs which have great medicinal properties and
which are also credited with the powers of subjugating
the wills of those with whom we come in business contact
or Rajavasyam. It is possible, that since plants have
special powers of storing up of electrical energy under
certain conditions, we may by obeying the laws of Nature,
add a large quantity of nervous energy, by keeping the
plant with us and this increase in electricity must produce
the result anticipated, viz. the subjugation of the minds
of those with whom we come in contact. Mesmerism gives
us a striking proof of such electrical energy. Here the
process is simple and easily understood. Say a man is
positively electrified, with an energy which is represented
by. He goes to a business man, whose electrical energy
is 2x and who therefore does not much care for one who
has only « energy in him. The latter to be successful in his
competition must increase his virtue, and this can only be
done by the concentration and development of the will
force, or by such artificial aids which would iaduce into him
a larger quantity of electricity than he possessed before.
Now by bringing in a plant with a certain amount of elec-
trical. power he gets more than 2x energy, and therefore can
compete with or subjugate a man, who becomes his inferior
in electrical strength. Mesmerism is based on this principle.
The contact of such people with others of an inferior power,
is always injurious to them, as by the nature of electrical
currents, they are always induced from the greater body
to the smaller as water always flows fiom a higher level
to the lower irrespective of its surface. Positive electri-
city has great virtue than the negative and our

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 53] =====
INTRODUCTION. 39

popularity and success depend upon our store of these
respective electricities, Our success in life may be de-
fined to be the readiness with which a proposal is re-
ceived by tho party to whom it is addressed. If the pro-
posal is not received favourably by the party to whom it
is addressed, the person making the proposal meets with
what we call a failure. How does this take place? Ifa
positively electrified person goes to another similarly elec-
trified, he is repulsed in his attempt even when backed by
the strongest letter of introduction. But if on the other
hand he goes to one who is negatively electrified, he meets
with a ready consent, even should he chance to be a per-
fect stranger. Those in whose horoscopes the Sun is power-
fully situated command more respect and possess a greater
indescribable personal charm which recommends them to
success, than those in whose horoscopes the great lu-
minary is badly situated. In che body of the work I have
clearly explained what is meant by the Sun’s exaltation,
and his debilitation. We have often seen that men with
superior intrinsic merits, find no favour in certain locali-
ties while others get on well there. The astrologer on
consultation predicts that they would find success only
in a certain direction and that only with a certain class of
people. As in medicine so also in astrology a knowledge
of the local circumstances becomes indispensible for a‘ cor-
rect estimate of the planetary influences and their results.
I can quote lots of examples from our daily life, which go
to prove beyond doubt my statement regardirig the elec-
trical theory above adduced. Take the favourites of of-
ficers. ‘I'here is an irresistable attraction by which the
‘favourite’ is attached to the officer, and as long as the at-
tracting force acts powerfully, the officer acts like a tool
in the hands of his subordinate. Ladies have their own

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 54] =====
40 INTRODUCTION.

favourites. "Some cases present such strange inconsis-
tency that we cannot really explain the action by the light
of any science we know of. A handsome, intelligent, well
matched woman takes a fancy to an ugly goom or cook
boy, who would be shunned for his deformities by an or-
dinary prostitute. Here we have apparently no cause to
explain this infamous conduct. A gentleman, courted for
his fine figure and handsome features by the best of the
ladies, takes a fancy to an ugly pariah girl to whom he
seems to be drawn by an irresistable internal force, which
sets at nought all rules of decorum, or public reputation.
The elopements we hear, the unequal matches we read,
and the infamous scandals we see confirm this view and
these cannot otherwise be satisfactorily explained.

In all these cases parties enter into the undesired
friendship with their eyes wide open and their judgments
unprejudiced. They tell us it is their weakness when
pressed hard to explain why tkey have been behaving
like this to their prejudice. Sometimes the attraction is
so great that ladies leave their houses, risk all their ho-
nor and die in the attempt to join their favourites. A
remarkable instance of this is found in the life of Shelley,
the greatest young poet England ever saw, wherein it is
related that a London lady of great position fell in despe-
rate love with him, went wherever he proceeded and died
without ever being requited in her love. Such anecdotes
are not few in the annals of theworld’shistory, On the other
hand we see, some persons hating the names before they
have seen the parties or vowing revenge without the sligh-
test cause for provocation. ln large towns where we go
for the first time in our life, we like seme in the bazaar,
while we shun others. There is of course no reason for
this kind of attachment and if we carefully scan our own

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 55] =====
(6) INTRODUCTION. 41

procedure we find our own conduct surprising. There is
what we call animal magnetism simply another name for
electricity and this attracts or repels us according as it is
positive or negative or north orsouth. We read of devoted
friends, relations or followers. They risk all their own and
never fear to get themselves into all sorts of troubles for
oursake. They are not calculating and we can attribute no
personal or mean motives tothem. There is an irresis-
table temptation within themselves and they simply follow
the impulse of the moment. Some of them repent after-
wards when the electricities change their sides but others
glory in their misery brought about: by their so called
devotion. What they do in the case of one man they
will not be prepared to do for another even when they
are likely to gain something from the bargain. It ia
with the greatest difficulty that they could be persuad-
ed to change their views and in some cases it is simply
impossible. Our tastes, on which partly depends our
success in life, are examples of the same unaccountable
influences. In some cases they cost us a good deal and in
others we gain by them. When there are so many forces
at work, sometimes in union, sometimes against each other
the results from such working will also be favourable or
otherwise according to the nature of the powers that pro-
duce them. Good planets influence us for good and bad
planets for bad and success in life means nothing more
than the resultant force of all these agencies working on
us. Two persons are bred and ‘brought up together as
very thick friends and they remain so for a long time,
all the while the electricities attracting each other and
making them love through their nervous currents. But
suddenly they pick up a quarrel for a trifling thing and
vow deadly revenge against each other and may even go

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 56] =====
42 INTRODUCTION.

to the extent of killing one another. People who watched
them before commonly say that there was some Vishghatika
poisonous or evil time and they fell out. On the other
hand, when two deadly enemies meet each other either
accidentally or through the intervention of friends and be-
come reconciled they say there was Amritaghatika or good
time. These expressions are not absurdly used. They
have their signification and a clever astrologer will be
able to tell us at what time, or in what place, we may ex-
pect these quarrels, or where and with whom we may re-
gain our lost friendship, All these affairs mak&8 or mar
our fortune. When an officer likes a man, if the stars
are good, what he says boldly will be taken for indepen-
dence and his services will be appreciated, but when his
stars are bad, the same expressions will be taken for im-
pertinance and impudence and they will be interpreted to
his prejudice. Theso are all matters which require an ex-
planation from the edacated public. The sayings of those
who have watched the phenomena in a particular depart-
ment of the world, ought not tobe rejected as altogether
useless, until we make the same experiments and find them
absurd. We can learn lessons even froma bull and if
it teaches us anything sensible I dont see the logic of
rejecting it simply because it comes from a beast. Gold
will be gold whatever might be the channels through
which we get that noble metal, and similarly knowledge
must be respected, whatever might be the sources from
which we get it. A man who watches the beasts and by
observations associates the happening of certain events
with the performance of sore acts by the animals, is worthy
of our respect, because he adds something to the store of
the world’s knowledge and however humble a contribution
it might be, still it cannot and ought not to be rejected

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 57] =====
INTRODUCTION. 48

asuseless. All our present sciences have had their origin
in similar ways. As the mighty rivers swell themselves
by the addition of vast tributaries and strike the observer
with awe at their mouths, so also knowledge strikes us
with admiration at the present time by its vastness, the
result of the accumulation of individual facts recorded by
the indefatigable observers of all ages and all nations.
The success and failure of man were keenly watched by
the intelligent classes of all times and were associated
with the appearances of certain stars, combination of
planets and the motion of the Sun and the Earth. I have
simply drawn the attention of the reader to these singular
facts which find an easy solution in the electrical theory 1
have adduced, but which become inexplicable by the light
of any known principles of human conduct. The Sun
shining through his millions and billions of rays, affects
our body, our minds and our prospects in life. He makes
man courageous or timid as he sheds a greater or less
influence on the person in question. In entering the
human body, the solar rays are not uniform in their effects.
In some organs they produce health while in others they
produce disease. In the growth of pulses this influence
is most remarkably illustrated. When they are about
to fruit, the apperance of clouds while the Sun is in a
particular constellation or a few drops of rain at the time,
destroys the crop by the sudden creation of a numberless
insects, which corrode into the seeds and affect the pros-
pects of the landlord by the destruction of the crop. Ap-
pearances at certain seasons of the year of large flocks of
birds, locusts or other feathered inhabitants of the air, or
large numbers of caterpillars, also add to the misery of
the cultivator. Have we any authority to say that these
swarms are not called into existence by the influence of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 58] =====
44 INTRODUCTION.

the solar energy reflected in various degrees by the other
planets and working in their own inscrutable ways. Mo-
dern science has been helping many of our absurd theo-
ries and great men have begun to eee that some of the
ancient Rishis were really men of extraordinary learning
and superior intelligence. We have seen already that
the chemical effects of the refracted solar rays are diffe-
rent in different parts and we have also seen that the
minutest surface exposed to the solar light has as much
power of refraction as the huge sky where we witness the
appearance of the rainbow. Herein lies the secret of
planetary influences. They fall on the bodies, they affect
their color, they change their constitution producing
health or disease and make them pursue a certain path,
which may or may not be to their advantage. When we
go to sleep we are advised to do so with our head towards
the South and feet towards the North. We know that
the red magnetic currents attract all bodies, which covtain
magnetisim and scientists have shown the world that there
is no object which is not pervaded by magnetism which at
another stage recieves the name of electricity. The ad-
vice comes to usin good spirit. We must protect our
brain, on the strength of which depends our prospects in
life, as much as possible from the effects of magnetic cur-
rents witha view to keep its efficiency. If the ancients
had not known the effects of magnetic carrents how can
we reconcile their precept. The effects of these currents
are not perceptible in one day or even in one year. A
morsel of food taken after a hearty dinner may not pro-
duce sickness all of a sudden. In some constitutions it
may do no harm at all. Disturbances in sleep for a few
hours may not give us ill health at once. In some hardy
constitutions such irregularities in food and rest,may make

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 59] =====
INTRODUCTION. 45

no impression for even years together, but who can say
that the constitutions have not suffered any injury. In
aome cases the injury is immediate and perceptible, in
others remote and imperceptible, nevertheless the injury is
there and must be felt sooner or later according to the
nature of the constitution. So also these minute forces
working on us and through our nerves, produce effects
which are sometimes perceptible and sometimes imper-
ceptible. We have also seen some cases where by dint
of perseverance and hard work people have succeeded.
Here the process is intelligible. When the application is
made the electricities may even be in a repulsive mood,
but gradually,by thedevelopment and concentration of the
will-force of the applicant the nature of the electrical cur-
rents might be turned and after a certain time they yield
themselves to the superior force of the applicant. Some
have succeeded in this way while others have failed. In
the latter case the will force of the applicant never rose
to that level from which it was able to induce its own cur-
rents to subjugate those of the party from whom he expec-
ted his success in business and the result was failure even
after long perseverance. We commonly talk of a man of
uncommon determination, undaunted energy and unpa-
ralelled perseverance. Here the terms are convertible.
' They mean that the person who possesses these is deter-
mined to overcome all obstacles by the development of his
“will power,” and thus gain his object inthe end. If such
conduct does not determine our prospects in life, to what
then, can we attribute them. In the change of opinions,
dress, manners, wives, country, religion, modes of life and
tastes, we see the electrical currents playing the most im-
portant part. It is effected in this way. Certain nerves
in the brain have been identified with certain tastes,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 60] =====
46 INTRODUCTION:

The undue development of such nerves at the cost of
others makes us pursue a particular line of conduct.
Nervous currents have already been shown to be under
the influence of the planetary rays and these produce
development or depression according to certain given
physical conditions. hus a particular nerve, whose
growth at the cost of other nerves, helped us to pursue
mathematics successfully may after a time be depressed
by the action of the solar rays by refraction and another
nerve might now be developed, which changes our incli-
nation or taste and makes us pursue logic instead of
mathematics. A man born with a great store of nervous
energy, which will be the case, if the Sun is favourably
placed in his horoscope, will get on in spite of all the
difficulties that surround his position,while a person placed.
in the most favourable circumstances,will lose his allif he
does not possess nervous energy in the shape of a strong
will or mind, which will be the case when the Sun is not
favourably situated in his horoscope. All the influences
above explained come directly trom the Sun and we are
entirely subjected to them. In fact we could not have taken
our present existence, if it had not been for his universal
influence. Now the question is whether the ancients who
have bequeathed this brightest gem among the sciences
which have been called into existence by theintellect of man
had studied the physical sciences with all their complicated
rules and thus obtained a deep knowledge of their pheno-
mena or whether they were blessed with that“divine sight”
with which they were able to see the past, present and
future. We are not concerned with the religious side of
this question and therefore avoiding all reference to it we
have to judge their powers from what they have given us
in other departments of scientific knowledge. Ancients pos-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 61] =====
=

INTRODUCTION. 47

sessed a deep knowledge in mathematics, astronomy, logic,
grammer, medicine, psychology, philosophy and religion.
With all our present civilisation we have not surpassed
nor even equalled them in some of the above subjects.
The astronomical tables found in the possession of Tiru-
vallore astrologers and taken to France in the last century,
have now been found to be more correct than those given
out by the best of the European astrnomers of the present
day. “fabulous” cycles of years given by the Hindu
astronomers in their Almanacks have been receiving
greater and greater confirmation from the hands of the
geologist and psychologist,while those named by the Bibli-
cal and half informed writers have been held to be utterly
worthless for scientific references. When we say that
the ancients, who have left us such splendid monuments
of human skill and energy, were sufficiently acquainted
with the principles of the physical sciences, I do not think
we give them any more credit than what they so richly
deserved. There is nothing improbabla in supposing them
to be acquainted with the laws of light, heat magnetism,
and electricity and when I saw ‘nothing improbable,” I
do not think I have put forth any wild theory which re-
quires to be knocked down at once by the modern scientific
youngmen, who treat so lightly our ancient sciences, with-
out the least effort on their part to go into their details.
A congress of the Rishis seems to have been held, with the
object of thoroughly investigating the physical phenome-
na and at its head stood Maharishi Mathanga with Sou-
bhari tor his assistant. They framed more than a hundred
Gen sutras or short verses, containing a good deal of
meaning but concisely written, for the sake of remember-
ing the same with little or no effort. A small portion of `
this work is with one of my friends and should circum-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 62] =====
48 INTRODUCTION.

stances allow meI shall try to pablish their contents
shortly for the benefit of our countrymen. In the portion
of work I have seen, the Sutras refer to Soudamini or
electricity and magnetism. It also givs us the composition
of the Sun, of the several planets, the composition of the
Earth, its minerals, its plants and its animals, with a
chapter devoted tothe physiognomy of man. The chapter
on electricity is beautifully written and when translated,
will reveal to the Western mind, that the hair-splitting
speculative philosophers of the East had also a good know-
ledge of the elements and the laws which controlled them.

This part goes under the name of ‘“‘Bhoutikati Bhou-
thika Sastram” and means a treatise on the elementary
principles of physics. ‘hey had also Vadum a treatise
on chemistry and their works show us ample signs of
splendid progress in this department. The comwittee
that sat to inquire, says the book, into the final cause
of the Universe was unable to trace its existence in the
terrestrial or celestial phenomena and betook itself to the
yoga practice, wherein they seemed to have excelled all
other nations of the Earth. But of course that is a
branch which is utterly unknown to me and therefore
the leas Isay about it, the better. The ancient Rishis,
therefore were not ignorant of the physical sciences and
could not have made such wonderful progress, had their
knowledge been circamscribed here. They naturally paid a
great deal of attention to.the study of the heavenly pla-
nets and by careful observation aud close study, extend-
ing over thousands of years,they were able to deduce cer-
tain principles which when applied to the horoscope of man
predicted his pst,prasent anifuture events to a remar-
kable extent. Times, manners, customs; civilisation, politics
and religion have changed and with tuem there must also

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 63] =====
(7) INTLODUCTION. 49

be changes inthe sciences. Otherwise they will be out of
tune as it were to their surroundings.

The Sun moves, the Earth moves, the planets move,
the dark spots in the planets move, comets appearand dis-
appear, new stars come into existence, while old stars
have disappeared and in this apparent combination of
movements, new countries, new seas, new mountains, new
rivers, new customs, new governments, new minerals,new
vegetables and new animals have been called into exist-
ance, while some of the old ones have disappeared altoge-
ther from the surface of the Earth. All this is due to the
motion of the Earth and our varying relations with the
stores of solar energy, which seem to be indispensable for
our existence and that of the Earth on which we inhabit.
In those days of astrological ascendancy, the observations
of the Hindu astronomers seem to have extended to India
and its neighbouring countries, and kere and there in their
works we find reference to Yavanacharya or Yavanaswara.
Some English authorities have spposed that such allu-
sions referred to Ptolomey of Greece or the Greek astro-
nomers collectively. But from the little [ have seen of
English Philology, the British Philologists generally seem
to have an unfortunate knack of creating the most absurd
combinations to answer their philological suppositions.:
The tnost absurd instance being in the conversion of poor
Hamilton’s Bridge in Madras into Umbton's Bridge, and
then going through the process of English translation, and
seriously calling it the Barber’s Bridge, the word Hamil-
ton being first corrupted into Umbton (in tamil a Baber)
and then seriously translating it into Barber’s Bridge.
There is no necessity to pervert these terms. Yavanas were
the ancient Persians with whom the Hindus had extensive.
dealings and the name Ivan, a town in Persia might easily

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 64] =====
50 INTRODUCTION.

have given occasion for the Persians to be called Yava-
nas or Ivans. The Persians were celebrated for their
early and splendid state of civilisation and it was no
wonder that their astronomers should have been quoted
as authorities by the Sanscrit pundits whenever there was
difference. There are many considerations which go to prove
that astrology like any other science, wasthe result of ten-
tative methods and notone that was directly handed down
by any supernatural power to man furhis benefit. In the
primitive stages of life, man seems tc have found everything
for himself and went on improving upon his past observa-
tions. A thousand years agowe hadour goverment and
our sciences were well cultivated. There were no foreign
conquests to disturb their peace and the knowledge they ac-
quired made themthe first nation on the face of the Earth.
Foreign conquests did subsequently a good deal of mis-
chief, and the unhappy turn the Mahomedan invaders had
for burning valuable libraries, resulted in the complete
destruction of many scientific books of great merit. Such
of the books and apparatus which escaped this general
wreck, were stored in underground rooms, so common in
their houses in ancient days, and these were eagerly de-
voured by the white ants, which proved in many instances
more terrible than the “bearded conquerors” themselves.
Thus it was a sail between Scylla and Charybidis, which
ended in the utter loss ofa great many of our valuable books
and scientificinstruments. People might laugh at the ideaof
our ancients possessing any machinary, but they will be
entirely mistaken if they think they had none. I am not
one of those that would praise the past days as “golden”
and cry down the present as “iron.” But in judging of
past civilisations we have to make very large allowances
for the destroying hand of Time. The Hindus werea

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 65] =====
INTRODUCTION. 51

compact nation of highly civilized and intelligent men,
and could not easily have believed ina science which had
no basis in solid truth. The ancient astrologers were men
of very superior intellects and their predictions were
invariably fulfilled. ‘This could never have been the case
had there been no truth in astrology. After the Maho-
medan invasion, the Hindu pundits lost their ascendancy
and became a set of mean flatterers and wilful liars. The
Political subjugation continued to produce its injurious
results and what they lost once has never been regained
by them afterwards. Various causes were at work, and
now we have aset of astrologers, with such honorable ex-
ceptions to whom my remarks do not apply, who are worse
than useless, and who make a precarious living by repeat-
ing an elaborate set of ties, which must be the disgrace
of any man in any profession. If there is any sublime
science in this world, it is astrology and the following
qualifications have been laid down as indispensable for
successful prediction.

(1) An astrologer must not be actuated by mean or

malicious motives.
(2) He must be contented.

(3) He must have high proficiency in mathematics.
(4, He must be well versed in astrology.

(5) He must have a good command over the language
in which he wishes to interpret his predictions.

(6} He must be highly intelligent.

(7) He must have a good knowledge of the times and
circumstances in which he is placed.

(8) He must be well initiated into the mysteries of
astrology and all its technicalities and above
all he must be thoroughly honest and truth
loving in his predictions.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 66] =====
52 INTRODUCTION.

These are not qualifications which we generally come
across among the ordinary class of astrologers and unless
we insist on the possession of these by them, we shall not
have a good set, who would bring credit to themselves
or to the science in which they profess to be adepts, The
help of experienced philologists is much needed to weed
out the rubbish from the genuine astrological formulas ;
and a thorough reform should be introduced if any im-
provement is to be effected. Without entering into the
grand project of establishing an institution where astro-
logy might be pursued as a science, with such instrur ents
as the nature of the subject admits of, the Hindu gentle-
men would be conferring a great boon on themselves as
well as on the science of astrology, if they only, as a pre-
limenary step, begin to discourage the prevalent practice
of consulting every quack who appears before them and
whose knowledge of the science has not been properly
tested and proved. In my experience I have come ac-
ross a set of cheats who possess a peculiar kind of know-
ledge by which they readily predict most faithfully the
past events of our life, but fail most miserably in their
predictions of the future events. Toa scientific mind
this kind of prediction presents a most difficult problem
to solve. When the past can be faithfully pourtrayed,
why not the future? is a question that has been often raised
in my mind. So far as my meagre knowledge goes I seo
no ground for making such onesided predictions and
especially with such surprising facility. On enquiry and
questioning 1 find out that it was not by astrology that
they were able to make such predictions, but under the
guise of astrology they put forth some kind of knowledge
which at present is utterly unknown to me. It may be
thought reading, but if so, how have these quacks mas~

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 67] =====
INTRODUCTION. 53

tered it when highly cultivated minds find a difficulty in
explaining that phenomenon. ‘These men cheat the poor
and the rich classes alike and even come round the intel-
ligent section of our community. All sorts of names are
bestowed upon this kind of prediction but until I see more
of it 1 cannot pretend to pronounce any opinion upon its
merits. Even granting such powers of past prediction
exist, the uses of astrology are not answered and what
we have already enjoyed, becomes perfectly useless t»
know again. Such men should be studiously avoided.
Others there are who are honored for the sake of the dis-
tinction theirancestors had attained,butsuch days are gone
and it is by merit and not by birth that a man will have to
be judged in these days. If there are sentimental] people
who pity the fallen greatness, they may help them for
their yi iable condition but cannot honor them for their
present stupidity. There are others still who from an in-
timate knowledge of tke local circumstances make correct
guesses and induce people to honor them as astrologers.
1 need hardly say they do not deserve our help They
touch upon a tender cord of the ignorant masses, viz, belief
and realize large sums. This is as it ought not to be.

It is very easy to ask a lot of questions, but not cer-
tainly so easy to answer them in the light of known scien-
tific principles: Those who consult their horoscopes for-
get that astrologers have the same set of digestive
apparatus, with which they themselves have been provid-
ed, and while they give them all the mental worry imagi-
nable, these gentlemen never consider it their duty to pay
them for the same so that the bodily apparatus might be
kept in a working state. Such kind of treatment even from
the highly educated classes is condemnable on two points,
(1) because it considerably lowers the efficiency of astro-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 68] =====
5+ INTRODUCTION.

logy as a paying art, and (2) because it makes the astro-
logers careless and indifferent in their calculations and
predictions since they see no sufficient remuneration for
serious mental work. While the admission of quacks must
be discouraged the ability of the adepts should not be al-
lowed to go unremunerated. There is another important
point on which I should like to say a few words before I
conclude my Iotroduction. Many have asked me and it
struck me too, that “even granting that astrology is a true
science, and can be satisfactorily proved as such, will the
mankind be in any way benefitted by its cultivation and
consultation.” Here there is room for much discus-
sion on both sides, and numberless arguments might be
adduced in support of them. I shall however state briefly
a few of the arguments leaving the readers to draw their
own inferences. Astrology has been considered to be a
practical science and like medicine requires to be proved
by experiment.

It is no use to get a prescription from a doctor however
clever he may be but it will be of the greatestuse for him to
getsuch medicine as would give him immediate relief. Simi-
larly there is no use of consulting astrologers when their
predictions are not fulfilled. Medicine kas been cultiva-
ted as a science from time immemorial, but the results are
far from being satisfactory. The percentage of cures is not
encouraging, and in spite of the enormous sums spent
upon medical experiments;in princely salaries to its adepts
and in keeping splendid establishments for its cultivation
such simple and all prevalent diseases as fever, dysentry,
small-pox, cholera,consumption and leprosy have not been
explained and successfully treated. It is all very well to
say that the average length of man’s life is now greater
than what it was before, that wonderful cures have been

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 69] =====
INTRODUCTION. 55

effected which the ancients had never drempt of and that
general health has been improved to a cunsiderable degree.
It may beso. But that is not much for the amount spent
upon the science and its supporters. Still it is a science
and every medical man whether he cures or kills, is en-
titled to have his bill paid in preference to all other clai-
. mants on the property of the deceased. In my humble
experience and observation nearly half the numbers that
present themselves in the hospitals go back without being
relieved and if more cures are effected than this low precen-
tage | have named, it is by the general prescription of aqua
pura aud the help of mother Nature and not by the skill of
the medical profession. I do not mean to say that medicine
is useless or cannot be improved as a science, but what I
do mean to say is that it has been praised to the skies
as a science beyond its desert. While every noble attempt
has been made to raise medicine to the level of a science,
nothing worthy of record has been done to test astrology
as a science. The ancients studied these two together and
they thought that the onecould not be satisfactorily under-
stood without the aid of the other. It is surprising that
astrology much as it is degraded, has stood its ground
against so many hostile attacks to root it out altogether,
and iv spite of the quacks into whose hands it has unfor-
tunately fellen, its predictions have not been such as to
create a genuine dislike in the minds of those that have
really taken pains to master its details. There is a duty
on every educated gentleman, to do something for this fal-
len science, or to keep it in reserve until it has been givena
fairer trial, ‘l'o know the future has been the greatest
ambition of man, and how can we say that such a price-
less knowledge will be not worth our while to acquire.
The most common-place argument senselessly adduced

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 70] =====
56 . INTRODUCTION.

by the so called educated sociv] reformers is “that we are `
better off as we are, and a certain knowledge of the future
willdamp the spirits of those who consult their horoscopes”
This is simply sleeping over our knowledge. There are
many diseases which are declared to be incurable, and
which when they attack a person, do not kill him at once.
A knowledge of the coming evil, will not kill such people
before they die. We all know for certain, that we will, we
must die. We also know that we may be snatched away any
mowent from the midst of our dangers or our enjoyments.
But how many of us die before legitimate death comes to
us. In cases of incurable diseases, the patients know
that they are subjected to forms of diseases, before which
the medical men simply blink, but they do not die because
they are subject tothem. When an incurable disease
sets in, will the doctor pollute his lips by making a false
statement that the patient is not suffering from it and that
he will live for one hnndred years. If not what difference
could it make with the patient between the statement of
an astrologer whosays that the planetary period is badand
therefore he must suffer from it, and that of the doctor,who
says that the patient must shift for himself as best as he
could,since medical science has not explained even the na-
ture of such a disease. Sudden dangers,it is true, kill sume
persons, but let them only smoothly be informed of the `
fact beforehand, the sorrow distributes itself and makes
its keenness as little felt as possible. “South Sea Bubbles”
often burst, but the shareholders do not die at once.
History has taught us that human nature is very pliable
aud accommodates itself tothe exigencies of every case.
Do we not know that our children will die as wellas our
wives; but this knowledge, than which nothing can be
more certain, would not kill everybody that knows it.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 71] =====
(8) INTRODUCTION. 57

What does'an astrologer say about the horoscope. He
simply interprets the language of the planets by the sym-
bols used and predicts the events that happen to us in
future. He foretells our Ceath, our sickness, our failure
and our success, or that of those who are dear and near
tous. What is there here that is not known to us, and
for which we are not prepared. Will insurance companies
teach us anything more than these facts? Every. sensible
man must be prepared to meet those calamities which he
sees around him. He knows that he may have to share
the same domestic misery as his neighbour and he calmly
waits forahe events to come in their turn. It is not in
the power of jan jastrologer to bring any fresh 80768 of
trouble on the man who consults him. He is something
like a paper man, who gives the evil news beforehand, so
that people might be prepared for the worst. ‘Prepare
for the worst and hope for the best” is a saying which
our social reformers would do well to remember.

If a man thinks that death and misfortune do not, daro
not invade his homestead, if ho believes he is above man-
kind in the enjoyment of his pleasures, if he is not bold
enough to meet the stern realities of his life let no such
coward ever consult his horoscope. Astrology is not in-
tended for weak or cowardly men. Ifa man, suffering
from some disease which requires a severe surgical opera-
tion for its cure, dies at the sight of the surgical instra-
ments, surely they were not intended for sucha man, and
the doctor cannot be arraigned before the court for com-
mitting or abetting murder. But the ordinary run of man-
kind is proof against such information and they coolly
bear even death sentences. Men with halters round their
necks and death floating before their lustreless eyes have
shown utter contempt for death and if the predictions

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 72] =====
38 INPRODUCTION.

of‘an astrologer até mors hoxriblé than the death senten-
oes Of the Jhw—admninistertng judges, let not such timid
tien ever ‘edtienlt ‘théir ‘fate. “Where ignorance is bliss
$48 ‘folly ‘to be 'wike.’ Knowledge ‘always destroys our
| gate by" crdating “one thousand’ and one doubts and if
or thd'shke'df this, it'is'not-désirable to cultivate it, then
it THI PAE Be ‘conrvente ty’sactificed for the so called peace
Of thing whidh' is nothing bat‘ ignorance and guilt rolled
together and ‘Which is nob’ prepared to see the light of
kadwledge’ ssid ‘wisdom:
प @raritlig’ that people die or‘get dispirited by know-
ing tHe evil that'is in ‘store for them and thus suffer di-
rectly by such’ knowledge, ‘How inany are there against
these’ people, wh by knowing their bright future and con-
sequent happiness, iduld vedouble their energies and try
to move “Heaven and Earth” to‘achieve success and gain
theit dbjects: The loss ‘arising from the dampness of spirits
in the casé of'the weak and the! timid, who afterall could
dono great work trom’theit'very nature, is more than com-
peusuted by the redoubled energies of the strong and thus
therb is actually no loss that we could see arising from the
consultation of hordscopes and: ktowing our future. If a
pérson'is afraid 'to meet 's cat in his kitchen there is no
hope'for hita: and starvatitn is the only alternative that
is‘left for ‘hin, but if 4 mpni has the courage to meet a
tiger ia a jungle: he'has'every contrivance to safeguard
his person against ite attack and guns have been provided
toil it.The torments ‘and ‘anxieties of people who
comitnence: ‘sotne bread ‘giving work when the results
aré not knowa, can ‘better‘be’ imagined than described
and what a precious thing i would be to know the results
beforehand. ‘Would it not prove a grand acquisition to
Ottr stbre of knowledge to: know whence we have come.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 73] =====
-ENTROPECTION, . 59

what we will be and whither we will go. .Can such a
science be called stupj
physics, philosophy and many

    
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 

fort to our material enjoyment. . i 1
they give us compensates for all the ‘labour ‘we ५ stow

worthy of pursuit by the a
of mankind. Every branch of knowledgé
advantages and disadvantages. If the railway
many it kills some, if horsemanship pres agilit
limbs it breaks them too at times, if the gun protects ‘us
from dangers it kills some by producing accidents, if wealth
gives us comforts ib carries its own anxieties and digcom-
forts,if hunting gives us excitement it exposes us td many
dangers, it education gives .us respect it makes us weak
and prematurely old, if marriage gives us bliss ‘it* brings
with it a host of domestic miseries, if powér givés ug de-
light it endangers onr position, if royalty has its “glorious
retinue and the pardpharhalia of state” it las its own
cares too heavy for ordinary heads to bear, in fact theréis
hardly any line or walk of life which has’ wot its countbrpart
in misery and which must be‘erdured fot’the sake’ of the
advantages that it might confer on'the' party striving
for its possession. ‘Therefore if astrology has its bright’
side, it must necessarily have its dark'‘sidé too and 06
sane man would éactifice a grand science for 'the saké ‘of
the few disadvantages it might work‘apon weak or’timid
men. I cannot clogs my‘ Introduction without ducting s
few remarks made by an eminert writer 'on the intellectiial

Lists uy

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 74] =====
60 INTRODUCTION.

greatness of our ancient writers who,gigautic as they were
in other branches of learning,did not consider the study of
astrology detrimental to the progress of their nation or in-
consistent with their avowed principles of utility. Astrolo-
gical predictions did not damp theirspirits and the few mo-
numents spared to us by the destructive hand of Time show
thatthey were,not only great thinkers but also great actors.
The eminent writer referred to says“‘our first study is ofthe
Hindu. I havecalled the mind of this race......... the Brain
of the East, isolated from muscle and nerve. By this Ido
not mean that either of the latter elements was absent.
On the contrary many of the tribey into which these Aryan
Hindus were divided.........:.. have shown very decided
military tendencies, while the race as a whole, is agricul-
tural and nowise wanting in industry or perseverance, as
their development of the physical resources of the country
and the wonders of their architecture amply prove.........
The latest philosophical and religious systems lay prefi-
gured in the depths of this Hindu Brain. It exhausted
most forms of devotional mysticism and subtle speculation.
In these spheres it left its pupils little to learn from Zeno
or Aristotle or the controversies of later theology? It
created one of the most artistic languages and one of the
richest literatures in the world. It compiled elaborate.
Law Codes in large numbers and besides its voluminous
Bibles gathered immense treasures of sacred lore, ritual
philosophical, devotional. Its poetic productivity was
prodigious. Its great epics Ramayana and Mahabha-
rata, containing the one 50,000, the other 200,000 lines
glow with a luxuriance of imagery which contrasts with
the Illiad ov Aneid as the stupendous vegetation of India
differs from that of Italy or Greece. All that this colossal
people have dreamed or done in philosophy, mythology,
ज

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 75] =====
INTRODUCTION. 61

ethics, imaginative or didactic thought,is here transmuted
into song......... The earlier Hindus had well organised go-
yernments, much lauded by the Greek writers,to whom we
owe our earliest reliable notices of India, for the wise and
thoughtful manner in which the interests of trade and agri-
culture were protected, the wants of stangers as of the sick
and needy, supplied and the defence of the state secured.
The law books contain minute regulations for freights and
markets and just rules for partnerships and organizations
in trade, for testing weights, measures and money, and
punishing dishonest dealing. And the organization of the
village communities, throughout Northern India from very
early times was an claborate system of local Self-Govern-
ment, that showed how large an amount of personal and
social freedom could be maintained, even under the
depressing shadow of caste.... ...India has at all
times been famous for its domestic and foreign trade. In
the early days of the Roman Empire, it was a great com-
merical centre for the merchants of Italy and Hyypt, a3
it was at a much earlier period for all Asiatic races front
Vhoenicia in the West to China in the East. ‘I'he oldest
codes record a very advanced system of commerical ex-
changes among the Hindu tribes,regulated by wise and just
provisions and a high respect for trade is shown by the
permission granted the Brahmans, in violation of caste,
to earn their support by assuming the functions of the
Vaisya or mercantile class. In more than one epoch, the
resources of India, natural and industrial as well as in-
tellectual have made the wealth of great empires. Its
delicate tissues, its marvellous colors and dyes, its porce-
lains, its work in metals and precious stones, its dainty
essences and perfumes have not only been the wonder and
delight of Europe, but in no slight degree helped in the

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 76] =====
62 INTRODUCTION.

revival of art............... the intellectual life of India was
profoundly felt throughout the ancient world. Greece,
Persia, Egypt even went to sit at the feet of these sereno
dreamers on the Indus and under the banyan shades from
the time of Alexander downwards and there they mar-
velled at the power of Philosophy to achieve ideal virtue.
And what treasures cf European fable, legend and mythic
drama further testify to the extent of our indebtedness
to India in the sphere of imagination and fancy down to
the magic mirror, the golden egg,the purse of Fortunatus
the cap of invisibility?.................. They loved to press
beyond material successions or conditions to general forms
and essential processes pursuing with special success,those
studies that afford the largest field for abstraction and
contemplation, the orderly movements of the stars, the
laws of numbers, the structure of language, the pro-
cesses of thought. They made much progress in analytic
arithmetic, and not oly applied algebra to astronomy and
geometry, but geometry to the demonstration of algebraic
rules. They seew to have invented numerical signs and
the decimal system, the zero itself being of Sauscrit
descent and the old Hindu figures being still clearly
traceable in those of the later Arabic digits. The intro-
duction of these numerical signs in place of the alphabetic
characters before used by all other nations of antiquity,
achange ascrioed by old writers to the Pythagoreans,
those orientalists of the Greek world, but probably an
importation from India through the Arabians of Bagdad
was the finest ideal impulse ever given to arithmetical
studies. The decimal system was developed in India as
a speculative calculus so earnestly, that special names
were given to every power in an ascending scale of encr-
mous reach. The filty-third powor of ten was taken as

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 77] =====
INTRODUCTION. 65

a unit and on this new base another scale of numbers
rose till a figure was reached consisting of unity followed
by four hundred and twenty-one zeroes. And these
elements were applied to the soultion of ideal problems
such as ‘the number of atoms containable in the limits of
the world taken as a fixed dimension,’ representing mathe-
matical reality none the less for being so utterly past
conception..............,.Bighteen centuries ago at least, the
Hindus had elaborate systems of arithmetical mnemonics,
based on numerical values attached to letters ofthe
alphabet. “They reached a stage of algebraic science,
which was not arrived at till the close of the last century
and if their writings had been known a century eariier
they would certainly have created a new epoch? Arya-
bhatta, their greatest astronomer and mathematician, in
the fourth century determined very closely the relation of
diameter of a circle to the circumference and applied
to it the measurement of the Earth. They invented me-
thods also for solving equations of a high degree. In
the time of Alexander they had geographical charts and
their physicians were skilful enough to win the admira-
tion of the Greeks. Their investigations in medicine
have been of respectable amount and value, lending much
aid to the Arabians the fathers of European medical
science, especially in the study of the qualities of minerals
and plants. In much of their astronomy they anticipated
the Aarbians; their old Sidhanthas or systematic treatises
on the sabject indicating ‘a long period of previous fami-
liarity with scientific problems. And in such honor did
they hold thisscience that they ascribed itsoriginto Brabma
They made Saraswathi their goddess of numbersthe parent
of uearly a hundred children who were at once musical
modes and celestial cycles. They gave names to the

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 78] =====
64 INTRODUCTION,

great constellations and noted the motions of Ifeavenly
bodies three thousand years ago. The Greeks apear to
have derived much aid from their observation of eclipses.
. A siddhantha declares that the Earth is round

and stands unsupported in space. ‘I'he myth of successive
foundations, such as the elephant under the tortoise is re-
jected for good and sufficient reasons in one of these works
as involving the absurdity of an endless series. If the
last term of the series is supposed to remain firm by its
inherent power why may not the same power he supposed

to reside in the first, that is in the Barth itself 2? Aryab-
batta appears to have reached by independent observa-
tions the knowledge of the Earth’s movement onits axis
and to have availed himself of the science of his time in
calculating the precession of the equinoxes and the length
of the orbital times of planets............ They alone among
nations have paid honors to grammarians, holding them
divine souls and crowning them with mythical glories.
Panini in the fourth century B. C. actually composed four
thousand sutras or sections, in eight books, of grammati-
cal science in which on adequate terminolcegy,may be found
for all the phenomena of speech. His works have been
the centre of an immense literature of commentation
surpassed in this respect by the Vadas alone. No people
of antiquity; investigated so fully the laws of euphony, of
the composition and derivation of words. The Hindu
Grammer is the oldest in the world. The Nirukta of
Yaksha belongs probably to the seventh century B.C. and
quotes older writings on the same subject, In whatsoever
concerns the study of words and forms of thought, the
Hindus havealways been at home, anticipating the Greeks
avd accomplishing more at the outset of their career than
the Semitic race didin two thousand years.” We have to

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 79] =====
(9) INTRODUCTION. 65

remember that this praise of the Hindu intellectual great-
ness and invention comes from a gentleman, who at best has
taken only a superficial view of the whole range of Hindu
knowledge,and which was transmitted to him by many per-
verted channels. Race prejudices have a good deal to do
with the formation of our judgments, and when a great
European scholar writes so much about the ancient Hindus
with such imperfect means of getting at trath at his com-
mand, and making allowance for the tremendous periods
of time we have to pass over to gather our knowledge,
we may once for all advise our social tall-talk reformers
to think twice, nay ten times, before they open their lips
to censure our native sciences. Sciences are not made of
common nonsensical talk, and he who thrusts his head into
the jaws of a scientific contest must be prepared ‘to be
crushed by its terrible teeth. We cannot consistently now
say, that a nation so great, and well advanced in the dif-
ferent branches of knowledge, as the Hindus could be guilty
of propogating a set of lies, which they knew to be such,
among numberless generations and its greatest men seri-
ously taking all the trouble to writa more than three hund-
red thousand stanzas in support of that science. I have
already grown lengthy but the vastness of the subject,
coupled with the numerous side issues which had to be set-
tled beforehand compelled me to occupy more space than
at first I was willing te spare. I shall recapitulate here,
for the benefit of the reader, the principal facts, already
mentioned, so that he might at a glance see whether
astrology has a scientific basis to calculate.

The Earth moves round the Sun, as well as the Sun
on his own axis. All the planets revolve round the San.
The Earth receives an infinitismally small quantity of the
Sun’s stores of energy, and this has been shown to be

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 80] =====
66 INTRODUCTION,

sufficient to account for all the terrestrial phenomena.
Light brings electricity and magnetism. Gravitation is
universal as also the forces of cohesion, adhesion and che-
mical attraction. The Earth has been formed into its
present shape by the action of the Sun’s light and heat and
these two great physical agents influence everything on
the Earth’s surface. The oceans are under their influence
as well as the atmosphere and marine currents. Metallic
and non-metallic elements are common to the whole solar
system. All these have their relative influences working
in ® thousand wonderful ways. Man is the result of pre-
vious forces working under difinite laws with such local
modifications as are found to be necessary in each indivi-
dual case. His physical constitution is under the direct
influence of the Sun, because the seed that produced
him, the bed in which he was nourished, the food
with which he is fed, the clothing he wears, the water
he drinks and the air he breathes, are the result of the
Sun’s rays working in Nature in their own inscrutable
ways. His brain cells and his nervous system are
greatly affected by the time, place, seed, food, climate
and other conditions of his life and his intellect is
entirely dependent upon the quantity and quality of
the brain cells derived from those sources. Vision would
be worse than useless if there had been no light, and so
also his cther senses, each of which has been made to
work under the direct influence of a particular planet.
All the planets shine by ‘borrowed light’ from the Sun,
and while retaining something of their power, they add
something of their own and thus influence mankind
in various ways. As the rain drops are affected by the
nature of the soil they fall npon and are influenced by
its properties, so also the planets, though shining by

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 81] =====
INTRODUOWION. 67

borrowed light shed influences peculiar to their owa. The
Moon exercises great influence over us and affects consi-
derably our minds. Lunatics, idiots and madmen exhibit
marked changes on full Moon and new Moon days. Sick
people always pass restless nights before new Moon
days and if they are seriously ill, every one despairs of
their life until they pass the new Moon days. The world’s
greatest men believed in astrology, and could not have
done so, had they not been practically convinced of the
truth of the astrological formulas. No motives could be
traced to them for passing @ set of lies on countless gene-
rations to come. Electricity has been declared to be
the great physical agent, which pervades through the
whole Universe and is the cause of the production of the
strangest phenomena. The intellect of man is nothing
but a result of the nervous currents, which pass through
the human frame, and which when largely concentrated
form what is called the mind or will power. Will may
be a separate ‘something’ ‘state’ or ‘power’ which
might have been placed by some supernatural Power in the
human frame. But whatever it might be, it cannot remain
for any length of time unaffected by its surroundings ;
and the food and climate are important factors in the
determination of our mind or will force. Will is there-
fore under the direct influence of the Sun’s light and
heat and might have been called into existence by their
combined chemical action. The greater the influence of
the Sun, the greater is the nervous energy or will-force
in man. The Sun is the great fountain head from which
we get all our electricity and magnetism. When he
influences us powerfully we become powerful, when his
influence is weak we become worthless and insignificant
men. Electricity is divided into two kinds, positive and

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 82] =====
68 INTRODUCTION.

negative. Similar electricities repel each other while
opposite electricities attract each other. ‘he preponder-
ance of these electricities in objects in Nature depend upon
a thousand circumstances which cannot be detailed here.
In Nature rivers, mountains, lakes, elevated grounds, for-
ests, plants, villages, towns, cities and even individual
houses have the power of storing large quantities of posi-
tive or negative electricities due to causes working previ-
ously there under certain conditions. They have also been
shown to possess the power of changing their sides, posi-
tive becoming negative or vice-versa. Our tastes,our success
our failure and our energy depend on these electrical cur-
rents. Almost inconcievable fractions of the Sun’s light
and héat have been shown to be sufficient to produce the
greatest perceptible changes in Nature. ‘lhe minuteness of
the atoms of matter has been given,and these inconcievable
forms of living beings, cannot have been produced by any
other powers we know of than that generated by the solar
energy. We have also seen what minute fraction of the
solar force is enough to keep the Earth as it is, with all
its flora and its fauna and now we have to concieve, an
inconcievable fraction of this infinitismally small fraction
of the solar power that is needed to bring an individual
into existence and destroy him again for redistribution.
The revolutions of the planets round the Sun, their absorb-

ing and reflecting powers of light and heat, the rotation of
the Sun on his own axis, the presence or absence of huge

dark spots darting forth vast flames of hydrogen gas from
the body of the Sun for thousands of miles, and their fall
again upon his disk, the passage through space of the Sun
at a tremendous velocity along with the other planets, the
nearness or distance of the Earth from the Sunin her
revolutions round him, all these must account and satisfac-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 83] =====
INTRODUCTION. 69

torily explain the different Listorical periods, changes in
social life, political convulsions, differences in morality,
alterations in taste, intellectual developments, the creation
of new species, the extinction of old ones and in fact
every other thing for which we ficd no record in tho
past, or no paralell in the coming future. It has been
shown that the gigantic minds of the ancients were sufli-
ciently large enough to store in vast quantities of know-
Tedge of all kinds and possessing as they did an acutely
critical turn of mind, they could not have been deceived
by the tissue of an elaborate system of falseliood invented
by the self interested priests. They made experiments
and observations as we have been doing and recorded the
facts in a similar way. ‘Ihere is a wide gulf of diffa-
rence between our modes of procedure and theirs,
but to approach a subject we have several ways and
means at our command, suitable to our knowledge and
local peculiarities. ‘I'he degradation of the science of
astrology has been shown chiefly due tu the political von-
vulsions, the ignorance and greed of astrologers, the anx-
iety of the persons who consult’them, and the difficult
nature of the scienve, which requires profound knowledge
and patient research. ‘I'ruth was held in the highest venera-
tion by our ancestors and the sin of desertion from its sac-
red shrine by the modern astrologers has been visited upon
them. ‘The mean jealousy that characterises the modern
Hindu and his unwillingness to see others making rapid
intellectualjadvances,have not Ucen without their poisonous
fruit and if astrology has not been as successfnl in its
predictions, as it ought to have been, the faults lie nore
with the professors into whose hands it has fallen, than to
any radical inaccuracies which are found in its countless
pages. Experence must be the backbone of every science

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 84] =====
70 INTRODUCTION,

and a handful of some experience is worth more than cart-
loads of theoretical knowledge. The rapid sale of my work
eucouraged me to issue a much improved and enlarged
edition and a similar appreciation of my present humble
labours will induce me to go more deeply into the subject
of astrology. <A self taught man, I had innumerable
difficulties in mastering the technicalities of the subject
and if I have succeeded in producing a useful book
for the public, I shall consider myself as having been more
than amply repaid for the trouble I have taken in itscom-
pletion, for the pleasure of the reader is always the pride
of the author.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 85] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

CHAPTER I.

ZODIACAL SIGNS, PLANETS ETC.

The Hindu cycle contains 60 years :—

1 Prabhava. 21 Sarvajita. 41 Plavanga.
2 Vibhava, 22 Sarvadhari. 42 Kilaka.
8 ऽपर]. 23 Virodhi. 43 Soumia.

4 Pramodutha.

24 Vikruthi.

44 Sadharana.

5 Prajotpatti. 25 Khara. 45 Virodhikrutu.
6 Angirasa. 26 Nandana. 46 Parividhavi.
7 Sreemukha. 27 Vijaya. 47 Pramadicha.
8 Bhava. 28 Jaya. 48 Ananda.

9 Yoova. 29 Manmatha. 49 Rakshasa,
10 Dhatu. 80 Durmathi. 50 Nala.

11 Iswara. 31 Havalambi. 51 Pingala.

12 Bahudhania, 82 Vilar bi. 52 Kalayukthi.
13 Pramadi. 83. Vikari. 53 Sidharthi.
14 Vikrama. 34 Sarvari. 54 Roudri.

15 Vishu. 35 Plava. 55 Durmukhi.

16 Chitrabhanu.

17 Swabhanu.

 

36 Subhakruta.
37 Sobhakrutu.

 

56 Dundubhi.
57 Rudkirodgari

18 Tarana. 88 Krodhi. 58 Rakthakshi.
19 Parthiva, 89 Visvavasu. 59 Krodhana.
20 Vyaya. 40 Parabhava. 60 Akshaya.

There are two Ayanas—Ootharayanam & Dakshinayanam.
The first has 6 months viz Capri, Aq. Pis. Ar. Ta. and Ge.
The second has 6 months viz Can, Leo. Vir. Li. Scor. & Sagi.

In the first the Sun is more towards the North, than
in the second. Tho lunar months are :—

1 Chitram. 5 Sravanam 9 Margasiram.
2 Visakham. 6 Bhadrapadam. | 10 Pooshiam.
3 Jaistam. 7 Aswijam. 11 Magham.
4 Ashadam, 8 Karthikam. 12 Phalgunam.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 86] =====
72 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR,

There are 6 Ruthus or seasons.

Vasantham—Uhitram and Visakham—when trees and
plants blossom.

2 Grishmam—Jaistam and Ashadam—when there is a
good deal of wind.

8 Varsharuthu—Sravanam and Bkadrapadam
season.

4 Saradrutu—Aswijam and Karthikam—fruiting season.

5 Hamantharutu—Margasiram. and Pooshiam——cold
season.

6 Sasiraruta—Magham and Phalgunam—spring season,

The Months take their names from the fact that on
the full Moon day of each month, a particular constella-
tion falls and the month is named after it. Thus in
Chitram on the full Moon day we find the constellation
Chitta, in Visakham the star Visakha, in Jaistam Jaista,
in Ashadham Poorvashadha, in Sravanam Sravana, in
Bhadrapadam Poorvabhadra, in Aswijam Aswini, in Kar-
thikam Krithika, in Margasiram Mrigasira, in Pooshyam

_ Pooshiami, in Magham Makha, and in Palgunam Poorva-
phalguni or Phoobba. The origen of the week days is
explained further on.

There are 27 constellations in astrology, composing
the Zodiac or the heavenly path for the planets to move,
and these are divided into 4 padams or quarters each.

The constellations are.

 

rainy

1 Aswini. 10 Makha. 19 Moola.

2 Bharani, 11 Phoobbea. 20 Poorvashadha.
3 Krittika. 12 Oottara. 21 Oottarashadha.
4 Rohini. 13 Hasta. 22 Sravanam.

5 Mrigasira. 14 Chitta. 23 Dhanista.

6 Auridra. 15 Swathi. 24 Sathabhisha.

7 Poonarvasu. 16 Visakha. 25 Poervabhadra.
8 Pooshiami. 17 Anoradha. 26 Oottarabhadra.

9 Auslasha. 18 Jaista. 27 Raivathi.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 87] =====
(QO) - AsTRoLoGIcaL sELF INSTRUCTOR. 73

These stars can be identified on clear starlight nights
by the following marks.

J Aswini... ...... 3 stars resembling a horse’s face,
2 Bharani... ... ... 8 starsin the shape of an woman’s
organ.
3 Krittika... ... ... 6starsresemblinga barber’s razor
4 Rohini... ... ... 5 stars resembling a cart.
5 Mrigasira ...... 3starsintheshap e of aman’s head
6 Auridra... ... ... 1 star bright as a coral bead.
7 Poonarvasu ...... 5 stars in the form of a potter’s
wheel.
8 Pooshiami ... ... 8 stars resembling a blood-sucker.
9 Auslasha.. ... ... 6 stars like a serpent.
10 Makha .. ... ... 5 stars like a planquin.
11 Phocbba .. 2 stars resembling eyes.
12 Oothara... ... ... 2 stars resembling human eyes.
13 Hastha ... ... ... 5 stars like human fingers, ~
14 Chitta ... ... ... 1 star shining like a pearl.
15 Swathy... ...... 1 star like a sapphire,
16 Vishakha ..._ ... 5 stars like a potter’s wheel.
12 jnoradha नि { 8 stars resembling an umbrella.
19 Moola ... ..._ ... 5s tars like a crouching lion.

20 Poorvashadha Two stars each resembling the
21 Ootharashadha points of a square.

22 Sravana... ... ... 8 stars like an arrow, the middle
one very bright.
23 Dhanista .» a. 8 stars like a man’s head.
24 Sathabhisha ... A hundred stars in the shape of
a flower.

25 Poorvabhadra 2 stars each forming the sides of
26 Oottarobhadra a.cot.
27 Raivathi... ...... 3 stars in the shape of a fish.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 88] =====
74 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

The Zodiac contains 27 constellations each of which
has 4 padams or quarters—thus 27 x4—=108 quarters, and

these must be equally divided among the 12 signs—we get _
200 =9 padams for each sign. Tho signs are—

1 Aries—Ram—Masham. 7 Libra -Balances-Thoola,
2 Taurus-Bull-Vrishabham.| 8 Scorpio—Scorpion-Vri-

schikam.
3 Gemini-Twins-Mithunam.| 9 Sagittanius—Centaur—
Dhanas.
4 Cancer—Crab—Karkata- | 10 Capricornus-Crocodile—
kam. Makaram.
5 Leo—Lion—Simham. 11 Aquarius-Water bearer-
Koombham.

6 Virgo—Virgin—Kanyya.|12 Pisces—Fish—Meenam.

For all ordinary calculations we generally commence
from Aries unless the contrary appears from the context.

There are 9 planets recognized as important and
these are.

1 Sun-Ravi. 4 Mercury-Budha| 7 Saturn-Sani.

2 Moon-Chundra.| 5 Jupiter-Guru. | 8 Rahu-Dragon’s
Head.

3 Mars-Kuja. 6 Venus-Sukra. | 9 Kethu—Dra-
gon’s Tail.

In the map attached I have given all the details con-
nected with the zodiacal signs, their owners, who are de-
bilitated there, who are exalted, their respective periods,
the constellations that go to form them and their colors.
The reader is earnestly recommended to note those details
as they will be found indispensable for understanding the
contents of this book.

GOOD AND EVIL PLANETS.

Instead of using the full names of the planets and
the zodiacal signs I shall here give their first letters in

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 89] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 75

all my future references so that we may not increase the
bulk of the volume unnecessarily. Tho reader will do
well to bear them in mind.

Sun—Ravi. I shall use the letter... .R.
Moon—Churdra do. 0०५
Mars—Kuja do, ९
Mercnry—Budha do. Be
Jupiter—Guru do. 1G,
Venus—Sukra do. Be
Saturn—Manda do. oo Mf
Dragon’s Head—Thama १०. oT.
Dragon’s Tail—Kethu _— do. Kt.
For the zodiacal signs.
Aries~Masham=A. Libra-Thoola=L.
Taurus-Vrishbham=Ts. Scorpio-Vrischikam=So.
Gemini-Mithunam=Gi. Sagittarius~Dhanas=Ss.
Cancer-Karkatakam=Cr. Capricornus—Makaram=Cs.
Leo-Simham=Lo, Acquarius-Koombham=As.
Virgo-Kanya=V. Pisces-Meenam=P.

Good planets.

G and §, full C and well associated B,

Evil planets.

R, K, M, T, Kt, weak C and badly associated B.

C. is said to be full from the 10th day of the bright
half of the lunar nonth to the 5th day of the dark half
of the same month. From the 10th day ofthe dark half
of the lanar month to the 5th day of the bright half of
the lunar month C. is said to be weak. On other days
she is said to possess middle powers. Good planets give
us good influences while bad planets produce evil. Good
and bad planets together give mixed results.

Movable signs—A, Cr, L, Cs.

Fixed signs—Ts, Lo, So, As.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 90] =====
76 _ ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

Common signs—Gi, V,Ss.P. » 7 2 >¢ va
Masculine and crnel signs are—A, Gi, Lo, ४: 88. ae
Feminine and mild signs are—V, Ts, Cr, 6, ©, f
Nocturnal signs are—Ts, A, Ss, Gi, Cr, Cs, these
with the exception of Gi are also called Prustodya
or those that rise from tail downwards.
Diurnal signs are—Lo, L, V, So, As, and these with
Gi form Sirshodya or those that commence with
head downwards. P forms a combination of the
above two and is called Oobhayodaya.
The 12 Zodiacal signs represent the different organs
-of Kalapurusha (Time personified) and they commence
from A. Those that are occupied by malefics are organs
not well developed or are partly or wholly diseased, but
those that are occupied by benefics are fully developed
and show. normal health. ‘They are :—

1 A—Head. 5 Lo—Belly. 9 Ss—Twothighs
2 Ts—Face. 6 V—Loins. 10 Cs—Knees.
3 Gi—Chest. 7 L—Abdomen |11 As—Buttocks.
4 Cr—Heart. 8 So-Spxualorgan}12 P—Feet.
ASPECTS,

Great influence is exercised by planetary aspects and
these must be carefully borne in mind in making predic-

* tions.

All planets aspect the 7th house or in direct line before
them,
But M aspects 38rd and 10th houses. more powerfully
than in 7th,
+/ G aspects 5th and 9th houses more than the 7th.
“` [ aspects 4th aad 8th houses better than the 7th.
The rest of the planets have vision in the 7th house.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 91] =====
ना

~

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

Friendship etc. among the Planets.

Planets havo permanent as well as temporary friend-
ship, meaning that the influences of the rays are bad for
all times er for a short time only.

In the map attached the ownership of the different
houses are shown but for greater convenience they will
be once more given here. Take the illustration:—

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

द्व Je > ८ = 2

Here the Lords of et Pisces | Aries | Taurus | Gemini.
signs are shown by being4 Jupiter} Mars. | Venus. |Mercury
marked in their respec- — —
tive houses. But it wil shtarn, Zodiac Moon.
be seen that though pla- “Capri? शा 7
nets own those houseyq corn ownerships. Son.
they arecontinually mov- Saturn | _  _
ing and therefore occup २०९५ Scorpio] Libra | Virgo
different houses at ail Jupiter.| Mars. | Venus. [Mercury

 

 

 

ferent periods. Thus when’ planets are referred to their
houses, they have certain relations as well as when they
are viewed with reference to the places they may occupy
at any given time. In the former they have permanent
relations; in the latter temporary. The relations are classed
as (1) friendship, (2) accquaintanceship, (3) enemity. If
one planet is permanently a friend, and temporarily an
enemy he becomes an acquaintance, if he becomes an
enemy in both ways he will be an inveterate foe, if a
friend in either way he becomes a great or bosom friend,
if an acquaintance in one way and an enemy in another
he becomes an enemy, if an acquaintance in one way and
afriend in another he becomes a friend. The rule in
permanent friendship is—the lord of the 2nd, 12th, 5th,
9th, 8th, 4th and lord of the place where he becomes for

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 92] =====
73 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

the|time exalted become friends, the rests gre engmies,
but some planets owa two honses while R and C own
only one house each. Take R. He is the lord of Lo. The
lord of the 2nd B, of the 12th C. of the 5th G, of the 9th
K, of the 8th G} of the 4th K, and of the lord of the
house where R is exalted viz A become his friends. The
rest are enemies. Here C owns only;one house Cr, and
therefore becomes a friend, but B owns two houses V, and
Gi, in which V the 2nd house has been mentioned, while
Gi has not been. Therefore B, becomes an acquaintance
of R. I will take another example. Take B, as lord of
V. for he owns two houses V. and Gi. Then the lord of
the 2nd S, of the 12th R, of the 4th G, of the 5th M, of
the 8th K, of the 9th S, and of the lord of the house
where he is exalted viz. V itself of which he is the lord,
these become his friends, the rest are enemies. In the same
way consult for other planets.

The results are thus expressed.

Planets. Friends. | Acquaintances. Enemies.
@R .. OKG.... B. ... ॐ. 8.
> ¢. RB... ए.6. 3.14. ... None.
0 +. GOR... SM ~ 2.

क्न B. RS... K.M.G. we ©.

^ ©. R.K.C. ... M . BS.
2s. ए. M. ... ६.0.
द्‌ ४. 8. 8. © . १. ६. 6.

Temporary friendship.

Fix the planets at the time of birth and then by ap-
plying the rule given here you will be able to find out
their temporary relationships.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 93] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTKUCTOR. 79

Planets which are situated in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 10th
11th and 12th houses are friends, the rest are enemies.
Take an example of a living horoscope about 9 yearsold.

 

 

 

 

 

R. is in Ts. G. in the Hee ` ह
2nd house, C. in the 3rd Kd 3. न |
and Kt. K. in the 12th PE ता
aretemporary friends. K. Zodiac Sign ©.
is in A, R, M,S, Bin the Horoscope of

. an Indian
2nd, G in the 3rd and C. Princess. 2

in the 4th are friends but
we Know that B. is his
permanent enerly and

 

T.
HX.

 

 

 

 

 

therefore he becomes an acquaintance. In the same way
it must be referred to other planets.

G, K. and R. are male planets. .

S. and C. are female planets.

M. and B. are eunuches.

Planetary natures are divided into 3 classes,

1 Sathwikam—Dwine nature—2 Rajasam or Royal nature
and 3 Thamsam or Vulgar nature.

Planets for the 1st are G. 4 अतट. and they produce
mildness, love of truth, charitable, righteous, god-
fearing and loving, and fond of helping their fellow
creatures.

Planets for the 2nd are S. and B. and they make men of
taste, loving romantic enterprises, well informed in
the different branches of knowledge, fond of women
courageous in battle, and lugurious.

Planets for the 3rd are K. and'M. and they are cheats,
tale bearers, quarrelsome, stubborn, lazy, cruel, vin-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 94] =====
80 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

dictive, fond of sleep, mean pleasures and worthless

women.

It is not possible to have plancts in any of these
states free from other influences and therefore in human —
nature we find a mixture of 8 characteristics

Fiery planets —R. and K. Earthy planets. 8 Hea-

venly planets —¢ Watery planets -4 and S. and Airy
planets.—¥. ge

“Planetary colors.

R.—Copper. 1B.—Green. M.—Black color.
C.—White. G.—Bright yellow.

 

K.—Blood-red. S.—Mixtnre of all
colors.
Puanerary Directions.
८ ` R.—Represents Soul. N.
=> C.—Mind. स. क
८ K.—Strength. ४. < ry ८ ट
5 B.—Speech.
Y% G.—Wisdom.
?©

} S.—Sensnal pleasures. फ. भ -----

% M.—Sorrow.
These states or quali- Ne
ties will be prominent ye ॐ
when the planetsare well 4 | A (प
situated, but when they a
are weak the man suffers 8.

from pain through those sources.
Quadrants or Kandras.—Ist, 4th, 7th, and 10th houses.
Trienes or Thrikonams.—5th and 9th houses.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 95] =====
(11) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 81

Oopachayams or improving houses—3rd, 6th, 10th and
11th houses,

Panaparams or houses next to Quadrants—2nd, 5th, 8th,
and 11th houses.

Aupoklibams or houses next to the above—&rd, 6th, 9th,
and 12th houses.

Good planets owning quadrants produce evil.

Evil planets owning quadrants produce good.

Lords of the trienes are always good.

Lords of the 8rd, 6th, 11th, 8th, and 12th houses produce
evil.

Evil planets in 3rd, 6th and 11th houses are very power-
ful and produce success, wealth and health.

Good planets in trienes are very auspicious.

EXALTATIONS.
R is exalted in... ... A. | Ris debilitatedin ... 1,
Cc do. ... .. Ts | C do. ,.. 8०.
K do. we a Cs. | K १०. ,.. Cr.
ए ` ०१०. we owe VL B do. we OP
G do. ... ... ©" |© १०. we «Cs.
8 do. wow RLS do, १५ ण,
M do. ... IDM do. we OA
T do. we ove Te | T do. ,.. So.
Kt. do. woe So. | Kt do. a.) Ts.

The 7th from where a planet is exalted, will be the
house of ite debilitation. Quadrants, trienes etc. must
always be counted from the birth sign.

R has his Moolathrikonum

in Lo. And M has his Moola-
0 १०. «» Ts. | thrikonam in As. This
K १०. ५५५ A, | means that the planets in
B do. .» _V. | their Moolathrikonams have
G do. ... 8s. | much power and influence.
8 do, see L.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 96] =====
az ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR,

Tirth sign indicates East and G and Bare powerful thera.
{Oth sign denotes South and K and 8 are strong there.
rth sign shows West and M is strong there

And 4th represents North and ८4 १110 8 are strong there.
3 and C aro strong in & As, ¢ and ॐ

र र ट oe strong in the ofher sigus or when
they tre in

njunction with
JR moves 1 month in each sign nd? completes the Zodiac
in 12 months.
C moves 2} days in each sign as the constellations move,
and completes the Zodiacal circle in 27 days.
K moves 45 days in each sign and completes the circleia
18 months.
B and S move 1 month in each sign like R and complete
the Zodiacal circle in 12 months
G moves 1 year iu each house and completes the circle
in 12 years
T aud Kt move 18 months in each house, and complete
the circle in 18 years taking a contrary mvtion to that
of the other planets. While all planets move from
A to Ts, and Gi and Cr and 80 on, these two shadowy
plavets move from A to P, and As. and Cs. and soon. -
M moves 80 months in each sign and completes the Zo-
dics] circle in 80 years.
Rand C have continuous and invariable motion, while
other planets viz K, B, G, 8S and M are subject to
changes in their velocities. When a planet, instcad of
having its usnal forward motion turns and moves
backwards rapidly it is said to retrograde or Vakram,
“plencts ju this state are powerful and give enccess
ond wealth. When planets have quicker velocities
than is usual for them, they are said to have accelera-
ted motion or Athivharam. Excepting R and C, all

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 97] =====
ASTROLOGICAT, SELF INSTRUCTOR. 83

other planets who join K aro said to suffer defeat in
the planetary fight. Phinets in conjunction with
are said to be in combust or Astham. ‘Ihe effects of
these states are detailed further on.

C, K and M are powerful during night time.

B, is always powerful.

R, G and S are strong during day time.

hvil planets are yenerally strong during the dark half of

the luuar menth, while good planets are powerful during

the bright half of the lanar m nth

PLANETARY CHARACTERISTICS,

R.—honev colored eyes, weil proportioned and broad sho-
~" “uldered body, bilious, courageous, short hairs, pre-
possessing countenance, self reliant, respeetful, fond
of daring exploits, and yoverns temples, chur hes,
father, soul, reputation, courege, copper, aad hot or
pungent things.
C.—rounded body, windy and phlegmatic, very intelligent,
awect speech, charwing eyes, governs mother, mind
intelligence, gems, watery surfaces and saltish tastes
kK —appears younger than his age, bilious, liberal, simali
aist, fickle minded, courageous, lover of dangers,
military look, governs fire places, kitchens, engine
‘rooms, armouries, gold, brothers, sisters, servauts,
lands and bitter tastes.
B,--hoarse voice, humorous and witty, possessing & reix-
. ed temperament, handsome conntenauce cunning
and prudent in managing his affairs, governs all the
baser metals, bed rooms, manufactories, eloquence,
:, intehigence, knowledge and mixed tastes.
G.--stont tair body, gold colored eyes and hairs, meri-
torivus, charitable, phleguutic, governs priesthood,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 98] =====
84 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

children, education, pearls, treasure houses, physical

health, wealth and sweet tastes.

S.—handsome, fine eyes, refined pleasures, tasteful, windy
and phlegmatic, excessively fond of women, clever at
enticing young and handsome ladies, licentious, go-
verns sleeping compartments, marriage, wile, iron,
enjoyment, wealth, vehicles and sour tastes.

M.—dark tall thin and ugly appearance, stout bones,
large teeth, bristle-like hairs, windy temperament,
base, cruel, vindictive, lazy, governs old and delapi-
dated places, tin, longevity, means of livelihood, death
and acid tastes.

T.—governs tanks, cultivation, rest houses, and maternal
grand parents.

Kt.—geoverns paternal grand parents,griefs, extravagance
and final emancipation or moksham.

The signs of the Zodiac ave divided and sub-divided
into various divisions and these have an important bear-
ing in determining the strength of the planetary combi-
nations for good or evil. We have first each day divided
among the 12 signs called Lagnams or Rasees. Each of
these is divided into two equal parts called a hora, and
its disposition is shown by the following rule. In odd
signs viz, A, Gi, Lo, L,Ss and As the first half is
governed by R, and in even signs viz, Ts, Cr, V, So, Ca,
and P, the first half is governed by C, while in the for-
mer the second half is governed by C, and in the latter
the second half is governed by R. In odd signs R comes
for the first half and C tor the second half and the reverse
for even signs.

The Earth turns on its axis once in a day, and du-
ring this revolution every portion of its surface.passes in
regular order before the 27 constellations, the time ex-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 99] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 85

posed in passing each constellation slightly varying with
the extent of the surface and its nearness or distance from
the Equator. I shall give the general extent of these
12 signs for India.

A—4 ghatikas. Lo—54 ghatikas. | Ss—5} ghatikas.

Ts —44 do. V—5} १०. Cs—5}$ १०.
01-5 do. L—5} १०. ^8--4¶ १०.
0८--5‡ = do. 80—5} १०. P—4 de.

A Hindu day has 60 ghatikes and each ghatika is
divided into 60 vighatikas, thus we have 60X60=3,6(0
vighatikas for a day.. English time 24—hours for a day 60
minutes for an hour and 60 seconds for a minute—we get
24X60X60=86.400 seconds for a day, converting them in-
86400 seconds
3600 vighatikas
seconds for a vighatika and 24 minutes for a ghatika, and
23 ghatikas for an hour and 24 vighatikas for a minate.
English hour is derived trom sanscrit hora which means
exactly 2} ghatikas or one hour.

The week days of the Hindus as also of other nations
were derived from this singular fact, and I shall briefly
explain how they took their names. When the sun rose,
the first day began, and his hora lasted for 2} ghatikas ;
then came §, B, C, M, G, Kin regular order and com-
manding their horas successively. In a day we have seen
there aro 24 horas and therefore before the second day
commenced these planetary horas passed three times.

1st day we have the horas thus ruled.

1 2 ॐ 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 i 12
R. S, B, C, M, G, K, 8, 8, B OG, M,

to mutual quantities we get, =we got 24

13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 25-24?

6, ह, 1, 8, B, ©, ४, 6, ए, 2. 8, B,

here we see the Ist revolution of the Earth on its axis
completed and at the time of the sunrise on the 2nd day

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 100] =====
86 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

we have the first hora commanded by the next lord of the
hora C. therefore the 2nd day is named aftor Chundra or
Moon, thus the horas for the 2nd day are 1 2 3 4 5

C, M, G, K,R,
6.7 89 1011 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819 20 21 22 23 24
8,B,C,M,G, K, R, S, B, C, M, G, K, 8, 8, B, C, MG,

This completed the 2nd day, and on the morning of
the 3rd day the first hora commenced with Kuja or Mars
for its lord and so was named alter him. In the same way
consult for other days.

When asign is divided into 3 equal parts each part
is called a Drukkanum, the 1st part is yoverned by the
lord of the house, the second by the lorlof.the 5th, and
the third by the ford of the 9rh. If we take A and divide

it into 3 equal parts viz, ==14 ghts. We have for the Ist

division the lord of the house K, for the sec nd division
we have the lord of Lo, the 5th from A, riz R, and fcr
the 8rd division the lord of S§ 9th house viz, G. Take
for Ts. Ist division is governed by the lord of the p.ice
S, 2nd division by the lord of V, B, and 8rd by the lord
of Cs, M. Consult for other houses in the same way.
When a sign is divided into 9 eqnal parts each divi-
sion is called 2 Navamsam. When A is divided into 9
parts, the lords of the divisions ure the following. ‘Ist A-
K, 2nd Ts-S, 8rd Gi-B and soon The 9th division is
Ss, with its lord G. For Ts the 1st division commences
from Cs, with M asitslord. The divisions are to be tu-
ken consecutively. Thus for A, Lo, and Ss count always
from A and the following 8 signs. For Ts, V, and Cs,
count from Cs. For Gi, L, and As count from L, »nd
for Cr, So, and P ccunt from Cr. When a sign is divided
into 2 equal divisions each pact is called a a Dwada-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 101] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 87

samsa. This is easily comprehended. Divide the sign

into 12 parts, and commence for the Ist part the sign it-

self, and follow consecutively the rest of the houses. Di-

vide A into 12 parts. 1st Dwadasamsa is A itself and

its lord is theusual planet K. 2nd is Ts with S, 3rd

Gi, with Band so on, Whenasign is divided into 30 equal

divisions each part is called a l'rimsamsam. The arrange-

ment here is thus. 1n odd sigas viz A, Gi, Lo, L, Ss, and

As, we have.

For tho Ist 5 parts K. for the next 5 parts M, for the
next 8 parts G, for the rext 7 parts B, and for the Inst
5 parts S. In even signs this must be reversed.

In odd signs:—

K M GB 8

5+5+8+ 7+ 5=30 parts.

Tu even signs;— |,

8 BGM K

SMP+ 7484 5 +5=30 parts.
Significations of the different signs:—

A.—resembles ram, indicates head, and governs shrnbs,
inferior jungles, caves, hills, fiery places and mineral
tracts.

Ts.—a bull, neck, forests, mountains, cultivated fields,
cattlo-sheds. .

Gi.— a man with a stont stick and a woman with a lute
facing each other, shoulders, musicians dancing girls,
eurpevters, places of sexual intercourse, gambling
houses and pleasure walks.

Cr.—a crab, chest, watery places, sand banks, large welis,
holy places, picturesque sites frequented by super-
natural beings. ,

Lo.—a hon-heart, forests,eaves, mountains,hunting places
inaccessible peaks and rocks.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 102] =====
88 ASTROLOGICAL SBRLF INSTRUCTOR.

V.—a handsome girl with a burning lamp seated in a boat
on water, stomach, arts, green meadows, women, in-
dustries, and places of enjoyment.

L.—a man seated in a thoroug’ fare with articles for sale

and a balance in his hand, navel, loins, abdomen, com-

mercial streets, roads, cities large towns, companies

of merchants or dealers and highplaces of cultiva-
tion.

So.—a scorpion in an underground hole, sexual organs
and rectum, natural crevices, dark places conceald
from day light, molehills, insects, serpents of all des-
cription and wild places.

Ss.—a centaur the lower half like a horse, the upper half
the head of a warrior with bow and arrows, thighs.
plains, battle fields, stables, camping grounds, cha-
riots, horses, armouries, sacrificial places, manufac-
tories of all kinds of weapons.

Cs.—half crocodile and half beast, knees calves, rivers,
watery places, jungles, lakes and their adjacent places
and openings in the ground.

As.—a man carrying an empty water pot, lower half of
the leg, watery and marshy places, fields yielding
inferior grains, places where birds gather in large
numbers, rendezvous of vulgar women, toddy shops
and gambling houses.

P.—two fishes with the face of the one turned towards
the tail of the other, feet, watery places, holy shrines
places of pilgrimage, holy rivers, oceans, congrega-
tion of holymen and tanks.

When « sign is divided into 60 equal divisions each
of them is called a Shastiamsam. Planets in good divisions
give much good while in evil divisions they produce much
bad.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 103] =====
) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 89

Tn even signs the order here given must be accepted,
while in odd signs they must be reversed.. In the ever
signs we go on with 1, 2, 8, 4, etc. and in odd signs we
commence with 60, 59, 58, 57, 56, etc.

In even signs we have.

1 Ghoramsa—bad. 2 Rakshasamsa—bad. 3 Deva-
bhaga—good. 4 Kubaramsa—good. 5 Rakshogana—good
6 Kinnaramsa—good. 7 Brasta—bad. 8 Kulaghna—bad
9 Garala—bad. 10 Agnisangha—bad. 11 Mayamsa—bad
12 Pratapurisha—bad. 13 Apampathi—good. 14 Davagana
—good.15 Kala—bad. 16 Ahi— bad.17 Amritamsa—good
18 Chandramsa—good. 19 Mridwansa—good. 20 Komala
—good. 21 Padmabhaga—good. 22 Lakshmisa—good.
23 Vagisa-good. 24 Digambara—good. 25 Davamsa-good
26 Indramsa—good. 27 Kalinasa—good. 28 Kshitiswa-
ramsa—good. 29 Kamalakaramsa-good. 30 Mundathanu-
aja—bad. 31 Mrutyamsa—bad. 32 Kala—bad. 33 Davagni
—bad. 34 Ghora—bad. 385 Amaya—bad. 36 Kantaka—
bad. 37 Sudha—good. 88 Amrita—good. 89 ‘Paripurna-
chundra—good. 40 Vishapradagdha—bad. 41 Kalinasa
—good. 42 Mookhya—good. 43 Vumsakshia—bad. 44
Ootpatha—bad. 45 Kalarupa—bad. 46 Seumya—good.
47 Mridwamsa—good. 48 Susithalamsa—good. 49 Doun-

-strakarala—bad. 50 Indumukha—good. 51 Pravina—

good. 52 Kalagni—bad. 53 Dandayudha—bad. 54 Nir-
malamsa—good. 55 Shubha—good. 56 Ashubha—bad.
57 Athisithalamsa—bad. 58 Sudhapayodbi—good. 59
Bhramana—bad. 60 Indurakha—good.

In odd signs commence from the last and go to tho
first regularly. Planets have 10 vergas and they are-—
powerful planets, exalted planets, planets in Moolathri-
konams, planets in their own houses, planets in quadrants,
planets in good amsas, planets in friendly houses, planets

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 104] =====
८

90 ASTROLOGICAL S#LF INSTRUCTOR.

in trienes, planets in their own Navamsas, and planets

in their Audhimitramsas. ‘I'heso are said to be in their

Vergas. .

Ween a planet has 3 Veryas it ia said to be in Ottamamsa.

When a planet has 4 Vorgas it is said to be in Gopu-
ramsa.

When it bas 5 Vergas it is said to be in Simhasanamsa.

When it has 2 it is called Pavijatamsam.

When it has 6 Vergas it is called Paravatamsa.

When it has 7Vergas it receives the name of Davalokamsa

When it has 8 Vergas it is Kunkumamsa.

When it bas 9 Vergas it is Iravatamsa.

When it has 10 Vergas it is Visashakamsa.

In Iravatamsa—the planet makes a man an emperor,
immensely wealthy and verp famous

7 In Davalokamsa—very liberal, a maharaja, and famous

C In Paravatamsa—many maternal uncles, well educated

and influential
t. In Simhasanamsa—well praised for his merits, a great
raja or statesman, a rich zemindar or landholder.

£. In Gopuramsa—wealth, happy, highly educated.
‘4 In Oothamamsa—blessed with all comforts.
*}-In Parijatamsa—wealthy,

SIGNIFICATION OF THE HOUSES.

First house signifies—nature, birth, maternal labour, com-
plexion, physical features and spirit.

Second house implies—wealth, powers of speach, family,

, eyes, journeys, face, metals, gold.

Third house.—brothers, sisters, maid servants, truth,
courage, anger, pationco, cunning, cleverness, ears,
self interest.

Fourth—relations, mother, conveyances, lands, education,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 105] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 91

happiness, pleasure, wells, tanks, gardens rivers,
doors, bovks, houses, beds, cows, work, medicines,
magic, litigation, witnesses, holy passages.

Fifth——children, strength, intelligence, councils, grave
thoughts and natural shrewdness.

Sixth—enemics, pollution,fear, cousins, sins,arms,disease,
misery, debt, and mental anxiety.

Seventh—passious, wife, cupidity, sexual pleasures, mer-
cantile speeulations, ambassadors, marriage, decora-
tion, exchange of commodities, gambling, and
venereal thoughts. `

Eighth—life, death, destruction, means of livelihood, fi-
nal emancipation, sin, disease.

Ninth—merit, teachers, elders, father, kindness, respect
for holy beings, worship, divine knowledge, peace
and happiness.

Tenth—respect, walk of life, reputation, command, work,
prosperity, merit, political success, business, strength
of mind, nervous energy, good deeds.

Eleventh—longevity, acquisition of wealth, success in life,
friends, elder sisters, gain, and pleasure.
Twelth—waste, sin, hell, heaven and evil deeds.

CHAPTER II.
PLANETARY STATES.

Planets have 10 states and they produce the follow-
ing effects:—

1, Deeptha—Exaltation-long life,successful employment,
good family, promising children, much wealth, un-
rivalled fame, respect among relations, good conve-
yances.

2. Swastha—planets in their own houses.—Permanent
happiness, sound education, good reputation, wealth,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 106] =====
92 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

. lands, “children, family, comforts and geod social
position,

3. Mooditha—planets in friendly honses.—good dress,
music, taste in fine arts, sweet scents, flowers, wo-
men, good position and general happiness.

4. Santha.—planets in good Vergas.—timely strength
and courage, helping relations, comfortable life,
wealth and happiness.

5. Saktha—retrograde planets.—courageous, prosperous,
successful in politics, ruputation, happiness, good
relations, wealth.

6. Peedya—planets about to leave a sign or in the last
quarter of the constellation which completes the
house.—hated by friends, and relations, dissensions
among family members, criminal prosecutions, thie-
vish propensities, expulsion from country.

7. Deena—a planet injan unfriendly house.—Sickness,
baseness, mean life, mental worry, derangement in
brain, social degradation or excommunication, bigo-
ted persecution.

8. Vikala—a planet ia conjunction with the Sun or com-
bust-mental, disorder, loss of parents and guardians,
many foes, expulsion from country, loss of children
wife and friends, public disgrace.

9, Khala—a planet in debilitation—constant losses, vul-
gar birth, troubles from unexpected sources, quarrels
with parents and elderly relations, imprisonment,
disease, misery and utter disregard for all that is
sacred and noble.

10, Bheetha—accelerated motion.—losses from fire, foes,
thievish persecutions in native country, tortures for
various charges, vulgar inclination, disgraceful life
and dangers in foreign countries.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 107] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 93:

PLANETARY OCCUPATIONS.

The rule; for finding the planetary’ cecupations is
thus given. Count always from A to thojbirth sign, keep
this figure, countagain from the birth sign to the planet
whose occupation is wanted, add the two figures together
and multiply this first by two and then multiply again the
result by the number of the years of the planetary Dasa
or period. Then divide the result by 27. The remainder
expresses the state in which a planet is for the time being.
‘he planetary occupations are variosly given, but I shall
give here 27 recognized by respectable writers on astrology.
The total period of man’s ordinary life has been fixed by
the ancients at 120 years and this period has been divi-
ded in a certain proportion among the 9 planets. Find
the ascendant constellation at the time of birth, of course
we have to fix the Moon, and the position of the Moon
thus fixed determines the Dasa or period of time.

The following explains the constellations and their Dasas.

Krittika ... ...
Oottara ... .-. eSun’s Dasa 6 years.
Oottarashadha ...

Rohini...
Hasta .

Moon’s Dasa 10 years.
Sravanam ...

Mrigasira ...
Chitta... °.“
Dhanista ...

a
|
Auridra ... )

Mars’ Dasa 7 years.

Swathi... Rahu’s Dasa 18 years.

Sathabhisha
Poorvabhadra .

Visakha

Jupiter’s Dasa 16 years.
Pocnarvasu

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 108] =====
9-4 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. -

Pooshiami ... 2
Anoradha ...
Oottarabhadra 5
Auslasha ... ०
Jaista-. ०. न Dasa 17 years.
Raivathi ०5
2114118  ,..

Moola... ==. | प Dasa 7 years.
Aswini 00

३. 1.1, ... ...

Poorvashadha | प Period 20 years
Bharani ॥

Thus all the periods put together will give us 120 years
the term of man’s life.

The planetary occupations with their influences are.—

1. Bathing-prosperity, good family and children, res-
pectable life, successful career.

2. Dressing—Political influence, gems, wealth, clothes,
fine taste, luxurious life.

3. Sweet Scents—Popularity, success in foreign contries
industrious and respectable.

4. Preparation for worship—Gain from lands, good con-
veyances and horses, enjoyment.

5. Praying—fond of land property, political troubles,
loss of money, serious charges.

6. Worship—intimacy with tyrants and thereby large
gains, popularity, wealth.

7. Sacrificial preparation—distress, billiousness,high edu-
cation.

8. Meditation—rich relations, wealth, loss to foes, gains
from lands. `

9, Kneeling—sweet speech,good conveyancesand horses
dissimulation

10. Going round the alter—liver complaint, dysentery,

criminal prosecutions

Saturn’s Dasa 19 years

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 109] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUSTOR. 95

11. Contemplation—Magisterial powers, agreeable fami-
ly and children, successful life.

12. Reception of guests—conceited, love for magical art,
finding hidden treasures.

13. Dinner—sickly, cheating habits, excommunication `
from caste, religious persecutions.

14. Drinking water—miserable food, contemptible hab-
its, hating all that is good.

15. Anger—hating mankind, egotistic.

16, Chewing betel leaves—service in high places, sound
education, great wealth and fame.

17. Entering the court—regular, pious, innocent, respec-
table.

18. Assumption of the crowu—glorious military life,

wealth and great learning.

19. Private consultation—laziness, sweet words, double-
hearted.

20. Delay—learned, dull, inactive and careless.

21. Sleeping—a hanger on, brutal treatment towards wife
and children, passionate, sickly.

22. Drinking—reckless, doing evil to friends, despising
worthy people, courting ruin.

23. Sweet drinks—healthy life, good children, luxurious
food. handsome wife, respect among classmen.

24, Acquisition of wealth—courteous and obliging, gains
from different sources, success in business.

25. Taking off the crown—loss of appointment, unhappy,
deserted by friends and relations, unsuccessful in
money transactions.

26. Profound sleep—suffering from chronic disease,
persecution from ruling authorities, constantly
tipsy.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 110] =====
96 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

27, Sexual intercourse—constant intercourse with women
of disrepute, harbouring evil thoughts, melancholy
designing, suspicious and revengeful.

I will give one or two illustrations to find out the pla-
netary occuptions. A child born on the 22nd February

1863 at about 9 ९. अ. Hae
The planetary positions द [ nr

have been fixed with re- Ke

ference to the almanack

of that year. We shall The horos-

find out their occupa- - cope of ——
ष a Maharaja.

 

 
    
  
 
 
   
  

 

९

 

 

 

 

tions.
Take R. Following the
rule above given, we qr | % Birth

count from A, to Birthl_
sign and find it is 6, count again from birth sign to the
planet R, we get 6, add the two together and multiply the
total by 2, then we have 12X2=24. Multiply this again
by the planetary period whose occupation we want viz 6,
24X6= 144, divide this by 27 the number of planctary

त 144 व
occupations, we get 57 = we have 5 quotient and a re-

mainder of 9, therefore R is in the 9th occupation which
is Kneeling, the result is sweet speach, good conveyances
and horses and dissimulation. Take C, count frum A to
birth sign, we have 6, count from birth sign to C we have
8, add hoth together we get 14,multiply this by 2 we have
28, then multiply this again by the planetary period viz
10 and we get 280, divide this by 27, we get 10 remain-
der, therefore C is in the 10th state, that is going round
the Altar and the result is liver complaint, dysentery,
and criminal prosecutions. Take the occupation of K. From
A to the birth sign we get 6, then from birth sign to planet

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 111] =====
(18) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 97

14 .
9, we get 18.280, multiply this by the planetary period
7=210,divide this by 27,we have 21 remainder, viz Sleeping,
the results of this occupation are given under the respec-
tive figures. In the same way consult for all horoscopes.

I have already given the respective terms of planetary
periods. These are divided and sub-divided, until we come
to the smallest period of time for our purposes. Apart from
the good and bad thatis given generally by the planetary
combinations ‘at the time of birth, we have also to take
into consideration the present movement of the heavenly
luminaries and see how these two sets of influences act or
react against each other. Ifa superior is good, and his
subordinate is bad the applicant fiuds some delay at least
in the disposal of his papers and vice versa. If both are
good he will have immediate success and if both are bad
he will be unsuccessful. It is very essential therefore that
these must be carefully remembered.

Planets go on revolving round each other in ondless
varieties and each planetary period has sub-periods and
so an. Principally we have Dasa or chief period,where the
planet has a gerneral control, Vidasa or period, Anthardasa
or sub-period, Antarantaradasa or minor period, Sooksh-
madasa or very minute period, and Pranadasa or minutest
period.

Take the period of R. First the planets revolve round
each other in the following order given already in treating
of the constellations and planetary periods.—R, U, K, T,
G, M, B, Kt, and S. In every period we have to observe
the same order. Let us take the period of R. It is 6
years. R now has acertain proportion in the general pe-
riod of life fixed for man, viz 120 years, and this proportion
he ‘holds in all periods however minute they might be.
As 120 isto 6 years the principal period of K, so is also 6

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 112] =====
98 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

616

to the period of R= ~> year 5 ig > 12 months

= a ==8 10118 ---- > 80 days= 18 days. Thus in R’s
principal period R’s period is 3 months and 18 days. For

C, we have 120: 10::6 =e yoars =6 months. But

there is another method very easily comprehended viz
multiply the number of the principal period of the planet
with the number of the principal period of the planet you
want, and multiply the last figure only by 3 and keep it
as days, and the first one or two figures as months only.
hua for R in R we have 6X6=36 here multiply the last
figure 6 by 3 we have 18 days, and the first figure is 3
months. Now take C, in R.=6x10=60, the last is a zero
and therefore gives us no value when multjp Lied and the
first is 6 months. Take K in R=7X6=14, we get 4
months and 6 days. ‘lake T in R=18X6=108 we have
10 months and 24 days. Take G in R=16X6=96 we
shave 9 months and 18 days. In the same way calculate for
qther planets. I shall give a table for ready reference.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| Ba 8
Planet. 1 ६ & || Planet. |Period 8 Be
| 4/8
py ey J mm
R. 1१ | 3 | 18 ९ ९ | 10 |
Re lg” el gr] 9 || POL aia
Reo she, | 4| 6) 0. ..1. >
क तः -. | 10 | 24|| 0. ..16. --|16
R. slg... 9/18} C. WM. --/ 19
Boo oe, (Me 11 | 12|| 0. ...1B.. | 1
BBS, cd OO ८. 1, | 7
Re RE. $| 61|| 0. 21822
R Bi 18 |... | ©. “fe | 6
|

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 113] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

99

 

 

 

 

 

 

n a
4a . 4a ध
Planet. | Period a B Planet. | Period! ह ठ
न | ala
K. K. 4 | 27 ¶. ,../7. ...| 32 | 12
र. 1 12 | 18 || 1. ...6, ,.| 28 | 24
K. 6. 11 6 7. ,..1#॥.. .. 84 | 6
K. ...JM. .../ 18 9 1. WB. | 80 | 18
K. ...8. :..| 11 | 27 क, ,.. ४. ...| 12 | 18
K. Kt...) 4) 27) Te ...8. 86 TL.
K. 8. 14 |... | Te. AR... 10 | 24
K, R 4 | 6 0. .../0. 18 |...
K. ८ 7 | eee T. VK. 12 | 18
©. IG. 1.) 2518) M. ...४. ,.| 86 | 3
७. .../M. 80 | 12 M. ...|B. ...| 82 | 9
७. .. 18. 27 | 6 || M. ...JKt ...| 18 | 9
७. ..-1४. ...| 11 | 6॥ 2. .../8. ...| 88||...
G. ...3, ..1 82 |... क. ...|8. ...| 11 | 12
७. ४. .| 9 | 18|| 24. ...॥. ...| 19 |...
७. ...0. ..| 16 | ...॥ ४. K. ...| 13 | 9
315 K .| 11 6 M. IT... 84] 6
G. wT...) 28] 247) ४. .../6. ...| 80 | 12
B. ...8. ...| 28 | 27 | ९४, ,..|९४. ...| 4] 27
ए. ...९४. ...| 11 | 27 || Ke. ..JS. 14 |...
ए, ..JS. ...| 34 |... Kt. ...)R. 4 6
ए. ..JR. ...110 | 6 | Ket. ...4. प |...
5. ...0. ...| 17 |... ए॥. द. ...| 4 | 27
ए. (६, ...| 11 | 27 Kt. t .| 12 | 18
ए. ...1. ...| 30 | 18 || ४. .../©. ...| 11 | 6
B. ...6. ... 27 6 1#. .. ४. 13 9
B. ...JM. ..| 82] 9 || Kt. 4B. 11 | 27

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 114] =====
100 ASTROLOGICATL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

8. S.—40 months.{S. T.—36 months. S.Kt.—14 months.
S.R.—12 ,; S.G.—32 __,,
8.C.—20 +, ` ।8..--38 ,.
S.K.—14 ,; 8. 8.-84 ,,
We have seen that R’s period is 3 months 18 days.
I have shown already that the planets bear the same pro-
portion invariably in all periods and sub-periods as they
have in the general period of 120 years.
In 120 years R gets 6 years, therefore how much does
he get in 3 me} months 10 days will give the period
of time for 1 year of the general period, but R has 6

108.
years . 1276-5 days.

This is the period of R’s Anthardasa in R’s Vidaaa in
R’s Dasa. Again 120:6:: 52. days to the answer =
6x27 _ 4 _ 7 = 27 days for R. This is B’s

120x5 = 4098 ` - 2095 100
Antarantaradasa—To get Sookshma Dasa we have again

to follow the same process.

 

274, 6 27
9 . =_> —_—= ~
120: त : : 6 = 106 2९ [ठप X24X60 mi
3
__ 3X9x4X6X60__8x9x3x6 __54X9 _ 486 .
nutes = 5000 =-= क = =19minu

tes and 26-2 seconds. In the same way it must be con

sulted for other planets. |
CHAPTER III.

HIOW TO FIND THE BIRTH SIGN.

Planets must be fixed with reference to the time |
birth, Good Native Almanacks giving the daily positions
of the planets are available, and those who wish to be

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 115] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 101

more careful should take the trouble of making calcula-
tiens which require a previous training and a considerable
familiarity with the use of figures, and therefore for all
ordinary purposes -good almanacks can be relied on.
Having known the birth time find out in what sign R is
moving at the time. ‘The solar month always determines
the zodiacal sign at the time of the sunrise. If we take
afew living horoscopes and fix their birth sign the
reader will be better able to follow me than by simple

theoretical rules.
EXAMPLE A.

A male child born on the 24th of March, 1883 at 6 a.st.
in Phalguna of Chitrabhanu. Solar day 12th of P.
At sunrise the zodiacal sign is that in which R is
moving and that is P. But R came to P11 days ago, and
. 4x11) , _ 44
लार्नता6 188 हकापरत ०१९ -शूत 8180145 1 gh. 28

V. gh. P has 4 ghts. for its period and the birth of the

 

child is fized at 6 a. mu. Therefore P remains ४ ghts.

after his birth, and he was born therefore while P was as-
The zodiac with the planets stands at the time

 

 

 

 

cending.
thus.
Here the lord of the कः तो Kt, | M. | ७.
house is G, and he is = --
ह Zodiac.

male, Ris in the birth .
- श Male child born
and he is male. These /—— o4th March, 1883

two influences acted str- | $. at 6 a. Me.
ongly and made the |

 

child rrale, | T. | ©.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 116] =====
102 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

EXAMPLE B.

A child born on the 6th May 1853, at about 31 gha-
tikas after sunrise, solar day 26th of A,in the year Prama-
dicha. As per rule given above, at sunrise we have the
zodiacal house A rising, R has passed 25 days already
20 200 V. ghts =3
ghts. 20 V. ghts. At sunrise there is only 40 V. ghts. of A
to pass. We have next ‘I's 44, Gi 54, Cr 5}, Lo 54, V 5}
and L 5}, total=31 ghts. 55 V ghts. It is clear that the
child was born at about 31 ghts. and the birth time falls
in L. Per almanack of that year the planetary positions

 

in it, and therefore we have

 

 

 

are thus given :— ge ६
Birth sign is agpec- (15 C.

ted by Kk, and K the most B. शः | Tr.

powerful of the planets -

in the 7th. R is exalted, Male child:

K in his own house, and |_| _ Born Sights.
. after Sunrise

these are again aspected 6th May 1853

by G. Thus the child
became male. C, Mand G. Kt.
S are in combust and

 

Birth

 

 

 

 

 

 

though they aspect the birth, their influences cannot
counteract against R and K. ‘

EXAMPLE C.

A child born on the 19th October 1891. 4th day of
the Solar month L. at 6 a.m.

At Sunrise we have the Zodiacal sign L.R has
passed 3 daysaiready in it and therefore has gained
28 +607 x2 x2 =F a4 V. ghts, and L. has still

2
4 oe ghts to pass at sunrise. The-child is born at sunrise

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 117] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSERUCTOR. 103

and therefore the birth sign falls in L. The planetary
positions at the time are :-—

 

 

  
  

 

 

 

The lord of the birth | [५] |
is S and she is there. R ९, नि
is also there but he is इ
debilitated. Full C as- G. Female
pects the birth, and these ह —-
influences made the child 1891.
afemale. I have here
given very brief reasons Kt. | Birth | BM.
but I simply indicate the न

 

lines of procedure in predictions.
DEATH IN EARLY LIFE.

I have shown the reader how to fix the birth sign and
the planets, and now proceed to give combinations for
early death. This is by its very nature a very important
portion and must be carefully studied.

1. A child born 48 minutes before sunriseor after sunset,
when C’s horais rising, and when evil planets occupy
the last Navamsas of any of the signs, will die soon.

2. Cin any one of the quadrants, with other evil planets
in the rest predicts early death. Thatis C, M, K
and R in 4 quadrants make the child die.

3. If the birth falls in Cr, or So, with evil planets in 10,

` 11, 12, 1, 2 and with good planets in 4, 5, 6, 7, 8and
9 the child dies.

4, There will be death if evil planets occupy 12,2, 6
and 8 without any conjunction of good planets

5. Evil planets in 1, 7 and Cin any housein conjunc-
tion with an evil planet without the aspect of good
planets, the infant dies, ।

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 118] =====
104 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

a

10.

11.

13.

14,

15.
16.

If weak C occupies 12 with evil planets in 1 and 8,

without good planets in quadrants the child dies.

If C with evil planets occupies 7, 12, 8, 1 ard is not

aspected by good planets occupying other than qua-

drants the child dies. If good planets occupy qua-

drants the child will not die.

(a) IfC isin 6 or 8 aspected by evil, but not by
good planets the child dies within a month

(b) If such C is aspected by good planets and not
by evil planets the child dies before 8 years.

(c) If such C is aspected by good and evil planets
together the child dies before 4 years,

(a) If such C is not aspected by any planet good or
evil the child dies within a month.

If good planets ara in 6 and 8 aspected by powerful

evil planets the child dies before a month.

If the lord of the house is conquered in the planetary

fight by an evil planet and occupies 7, the child dies

before a month.

If week C occupies birth sign and evil planets are in

8, 4,7 and 10 the child dies soon.

. If Cis in 4, 7, 8 and has two or more evil planets

on both her sides the child will die at once.

Cin the birth, evil planets in 2, 12, 7, and 8, and
none of these has any good aspect, the child and
mcther will both die.

If C oceupies the last Navamsa of any sign, and not
aspected by good planets, and with evil planets in 5
and 9 the child dies soon. :

C in birth and evil planets in 7 will kill the child.

C with M, T, and K occupy 8th the child and mother
will koth die. .

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 119] =====
(14) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTBUCTOR. 105

17.

18

19.

20.

21.

22.

28.

24,

26.

27.

23,

If R with Mor B, and with T, occupy birth, and K in
8 the child as well as its mother,will be put to death
by weapons or will be murdered.

R or C in birth, without good aspect and evil planets
in 5, 8, and 9, the child end mother will die.

M in 12, R in9, C in birth, and K in 8, and these are
not aspected by good planets, the child dies, but if
G is in 5 and aspects all these powerfully there is no
fear for the child.

If weak C with evil planets, not aspected by good
ones occupy 5. 7, 9, 12, 1, or 8 the child dies soon.
If K without good aspect occupies 1, while M is in 6
or 8, or if K and M together occupy 7 without good
aspect the child dies at once.

Children born while Cr is passing and Lo rising, or
So passing and Ss rising, or P is passing and A is
rising will not live long. Here the last half ghatika
of the passing and the first half of the rising are con-
sidered to be unfavourable.

If R and C occupy 3 owned by evil planets and as-
pected by them the child dies before 3 years.

If R and K occupy 7th house from C and the 3 Drak-
kanoms of the birth are occupied by evil planets the
child dies before 10 days after birth.

. If weak C is in birth and the other planets occupy 8,

6, and 12, the child dies soon.

If the lord of the birth is weak, and evil planets
occupy the birth sign, children born during eclipses
under such combinations will die in 2 or 3 months.
If T with evil planets, without the aspect of good pla-
nets occupy any one of the quadrants the child dies
early.

If weak C is with T in birth, aspected by evil planets

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 120] =====
1€6 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

30.

31.

82.

37.

38.

the child dies soon. This has two exceptions ‘1)
when T is in A, (2) when T is in ‘I's, in these cases
there will be sickness, but no danger for life.

. If Gis not in 8, the lord of birth is with an evil pla-

net aspected by M, and an ovil planet occupies birth
sign, the child dies.

If Risin 7, M in 1, K in 8 and C is not aspected by
good planets the infant dies.

If G is in So, or Gi aspected by R, C, K, and M, and
these are not aspected by S the babe is born dead.
If C is in the 20th part of A (divide the signs into 30
equal parts as already explained in the prececing
chapter), 21 of Lo, 8 of T's, 22 of Cr, 4 of L, 20 of Cs
1 of V, 18 of Ss, 10 of P, 22 of Gi, then the infant
dies at the ages respectively denoted by the figures.
If R,.M, and K occupy birth, S in 7 and C is weak
and not aspected bp G the child dies before 7 years.
If T is in 7 and is aspected by M, R and other evil
planets the child will live up to che 12th year.

. lf As, So or Lo becomes the birth sign with T in it

aspected by evil planets but not aspected by power-
ful G the boy dies before 17 years,

If R, Cand K occupy 5 without being in conjune-
tion with or aspected by good planets the child dies
before 9 years.

If the lord of birth is there with all the evil planets
and is not aspected by good ones, the child dies
before 4 months.

If the lord of the birth occupies 3, 6, or 12 and evil
planets occupy 8 and 6 without the aspect of good
planets the boy will not survive his ]6th year.

39 If the lord of birth is in 8 and the lord of 8 is in 1,

and the lord of 2 occupies 6 or 12 the boy dies in his

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 121] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 107

18th year
40. If retrograde M occupies A or So, and if K is in 6, 8

or any one of the quadrants without good aspect the

hild dies before two years

Ihave given at considerable length the planetary
positions for early death, for without proper foundation
no superstructure will be permanent or lasting. This is
very important und requires to be carefully studied and
remembered. I have not exhausted the combinations for
early death, but I have given the most important for the
guidance of the reader. ‘I'he principal points here seem
to be that the birth sign should not be between two evil
planets, as also the 7th, that C should always have some
good aspect,that evil planets should not occupy quadrants
without good aspect, that the lord of the birth sign should
be well situated and aspected, that good planets should
occupy quadrants or trienes aud that the &th house and
M should also be powerful. In theso cases the child’s life
will be long. I shall here state a few combinations which
counteract against the above influences for early death.

1. G powerfully situated in birth sign will avert all evil.

2. If the lord of the birth has no evil aspect, but has
the aspect of good planets situated in quadrants
there is no danger.

3, Even when C is placed in 8, if she occupies any of
the Drakkanams of G, S, or B, there is no danger
to the child.

4. Full C in good house, placed between two auspicious
planets, and aspected by S will give long life.

5. If S, B or G is powerfully placed in any one of the
quadrants even in conjunction with evil planets
the child will have good long life.

6. 1 C isin 6 but occupies any of the Drukkanams of G,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 122] =====
108 ASTROLOGICAL, SELF INSTRUCTOR.

B or § there is no danger.

7. When C is between two powerful good planets there
is no fear.

8. Even when C is in 6 or 8, if she is full, she will pro-
tect the child born during the nights of full moon

. days or the days of the new moon days.

9. When full C aspects birth aign with G-in one of the
quadrants there is no danger.

10, When G, §, full C and B occupy auspicious houses,
Drakkanams or Navamsas they protect the child’s
life against all evil influences.

‘11. If evil planets gre in auspicious sub-divisions aspec-

ˆ ted by good planets in auspicious Navamsas the
child will live long.

I2. If any one of the good planets has suffered defeat,
and is aspected by another auspicious planet the
child has long life

In determining the good and evil influences, we have
alweys to take into account the planetary states, occupa-
tions, exaltations, debilitations, positional, diurnal, noc-
turnal, lateral and periodical strength,and then say which
planets have the greatest power. Ifthe evil planets are
stronger, and are unfavourably situated they give death
or prolonged sickness, but if the good planets are stron-
ger and are favourably situated, they give health wealth
and long life. If they are equally balanced then partly
good and partly bad life.

SHORT LIFE.

By this is meant those that die before they are 32 but
after 8 years old. The combinations already explained
indicate death, with a few exceptions, before the 8th year
and it is technically called Balarista. Short life in Sans-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 123] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 109

krit works is termed Alpayu, and this refers to those that

die after 8 but before 82 years. The combinations are

given for a féw of these cases.

1. Evil planets in 8, 6, 12, with lord of the birth weakly
placed without the aspect of good planets give short
life.

2. Ifevil pianets occupy quadrants without the aspeot
of good planets, and the lord of the house is not
powerful the child will have short life.

8. Kivil planets in 2 and 12 and occupying evil sub-divi-
sions without good aspect give short life ^.

4. I£ Ris debilitated or occupies an, unfavourable posi-
tion the child will have short life.

MIDDLE LIFE.

Those that die after 32 but before 70 years of age
are said to have Madhyayu or Middle life and the follow-
ing combinations give a few examples of middle life.

1, I£ Cis in A, or So, as the birth sign, aspected by evil
planets with good planets occupying other than
quadrants the boy dies in his 33rd year,

2. If the lord of 8 with evil planets and C occupy qua-
drants or trienes, and evil planets aspect 10 the
man dies in his 38rd year.

8. If the lord of the birth is in 6 or 8 with evil planets,
not aspected by good planets the man lives up to 45,

4. Cin A, lord of the birth is powerful, aspected by good
planets he dies in the 47th year after a successful
life.

5. M in birth, C in 8 or 12 and other planets in 11, the
man dies in the 52nd year.

6. Gin Ss being the birth sign, K and T in 8 kill the
man in the 57th year.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 124] =====
110 ASTROLOGICAL SKLF INSTRUCTOR.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

man in the 57th year.

C with evil planets, and tke lord of the 8th in the
7th kill the man in the 58th year.

As being the birth, G in 8, and evil planets in the
quadrants make a man charitable, holy, learned, and

kill him when he is 60.

Min birth, Cin 4, Kin 7 and Rin 10 with G, S,

and B occupying unfavourable houses give him 60
yeurs of life.

Sin 10 aspected by B, G and C make the man live
up to 60.

S in Birth, B and M in quadrants, and other planets
exalted occupy 3 and 11, the person will have a
bright life up to 60 years.

R with lord of the birth in 10, M in the birth sign,
G in 4 give the person 68 years of life.

Birth sign Cr with C in it, Min A and Rin 7 will
give 65 years of life.

M debilitated occupying quadrants or trienes and B
with R or without him occupies quadrants, give the
person 70 years of life, and make him good, charita-
ble and learned.

Good planets occupying quadrants, 8th house with-
out any aspect from them, and the lord of the birth
with the aspect of the evil planets give a man 70
years of life.

K in 5, M debilitated, and Rin 7 the person will
have 70 years of life.

LONG LIFE.
Those who live above 70 and up to 120 are said to

enjoy long life aud generally sach cases are not many.
The following combinations show long life :—

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 125] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 111

1, All good planets in the first 6 houses from birth, and
all bad planets in the next 6 houses makea man
rich, educated, good natured and live up to 80 years
of age,

2. Good planets in quadrants, 8 not occupied by evil
planets, and C in 6 give the man 86 years of life.

8. G in quadrants from the lord of the birth, and evil
planets are not in quadrants or trienes the person
lives up to 100.

Lo birth sign, and four planets occupy the trienes the
man lives for 100 years.

5. If Ts or Cr is birth sign with G in it and 3 planets are
exalted, the person lives up to 100 years. G is exal-
ted in Cr, and if that becomes birth sign, the exalta-
tion of two more planets is enough to give this long
life.

6. S in 4, G in birth, and C and M in 10 give the person
long life, good name, high education, and moderate
wealth.

If the birth sign falls in the 2nd half of Cs, with K
in the first half, C in birth siga and G occupies one
of the quadrants the persen lives for more than a
hundred vears.

8. If the birth time falls in the last Navamsa of P, C in
the 5th Thrimsamsa of Ts and other planets are ex-
alted, the peoson lives for 120 years and 5 days.
From time immemorial we have historical as well as

ordinary legends which give out the names of persons

who have lived for more than 120 years and 5 days the
age fixed for the ordinary mankind. ‘The Bible Kuran
and our own Puranas give the names of persons who have
lived for hundreds and thousands of years. If the rules
.of life are carefully known and the circumstances of a

>

च

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 126] =====
112 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

man’s career are favourable and he possess an abundant
supply of nervous energy given by auspicious planetary
influences, I do not see that such long lives or oither im-
possible, or could not have been ‘enjoyed. The Encyclo-
pheedia Brittanica gives the names of persons who have
lived quite recently for more than 150 years, and it might
have been possible, and many still be possible provided
we have the necessary planetary combinations to lead
such long lives. The following combjnations indicate
unlimited terms of life.

UNLIMITED PERIODS OF LIFE.

. If birth sign is Cr with C and G@ there, S and B in
quadrants and K, R and M occupy 3, 6 and 11 the
person will live for a very long time.

2. Birth sign Lo with G, § in Cr. Bin V evil planets in

8, 6 and 11 the person lives for a thousand years.

3. If birth sign is A, Rin Cr, M in Cs, K in L, and
powerful C in P, the person lives for 2,000 years.

4. No evil planets in trienes, no good planets in quadrants
and no evil planets in 8, will make a man live for a
long time.

5. Birth sign in Ts with S, Gin quadrants, and the rest
in 8, 6, 10 and 11 will give a man very long life

6. Birth sign in Cr, M in L, C in Ts, G in Cs will give a
man very long life.

7. G,M, K and S must be in quadrants to each other, if
80 they give very long life.

8. If birth sign is Lo, G, C, Sand B occupy quadrants,
with R, M, and K in 3, 6 and11 the person lives
four thousands of yeare
I shall give here a few combinations for becoming

yogees, who live as long as they please, and depart this

~

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 127] =====
(15) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 113

life at their pleasure and will.
1. ‘The seven planets must commence from Cr, and
occupy consecutively the following signs viz, Cr,
Lo, V, L, So, Ss. There should be no break in the
middle. Then tho person will become a great yogee.

. If all the planets are between C and G, then the per-
son becomes a yogee.

8. If all the plancts are between M and K, the man be-

comes a yogee.

4. When Cs is the birth sign and all the planets are bet-
ween R and K he becomes a great Mahatma.

. If the birth time is in the last Navamsa of A, with G
or § in it, C in 2 and K in Simhasanamsa or in the
5th Navamsa of Ss, the man becomes a great Ma-
hatma.

6. If Cr is Birth sign with G in it, Min L, Cin Ts, S in
Gi, and R and Bin immovable signs, the person
becomes a great Muni.

7. When C occupies Davalokamsa, K in Paravatamsa,
and R in Simhasanamsa he becomes a Muni.

8. If Ais birth sign, R in 10, G in Cr, and the rest of
the evil planets occupy 3, 6, and 11, the person will
have great spiritual excellence.

CHAPTER IV.

MISFORTUNES.

19

a

‘This chapter as well as the preceding one becomes very
im portant as we have to know how times stand with us,
and what precautions, ifany, we could take to minimize
their evil results or counteract against them altogether.
A reference to the processes by which we can counteract
against thoso ovil influonces, has been already made by

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 128] =====
114 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR,

me in the Introduction, which though not completeas it can
never be, will throw some hints as to how we my contend
against the surrounding natural forces working upon us,
in some cases attempting to bind them to our interests,
without any perceptible effect, in others slightly protec-
ting ourselves against their attacks, and again in others
completely setting them and their results at defiance.

This is a very difficult ‘part of the subject, but ००-
thing is beyond the reach of human intellect, and though
we may not grasp many ideas at the commencement we
are sure to do so if we are strongly determined to do it.
‘Where there is a will there is a way’ isa saying which
might be remembered with great advantage by every
reader. Under each of the heads of the different signifi-
cations of the signs, I shall give some examples of good
and evil influences, but here I shall state the greatest mis-
fortunes with which mankind is ferquently visited, and
for which every one of us must be prepared whether we
like them or not.

1 T with lord of the 2ndin 6, or the lord of the sign
where T is placed join withthe lord of the 2nd
the man suffers from constant tooth-ache.

2 If the lord of 2 is with the lord of 6 or lord of the
house where the lord of 2 is placed join with the
lord of the Navamsa where he is placed, then du-
ring their periods or sub-periods the man will have
his teeth knocked off.

3 If the lord of 2 is with M or with any other'evil planet
the person suffers from constant complicated dis-
ease.

4 If R in birth sign occupies a debilitated Navamsa,or is
in conjunction with evil planets, the person’s eyes
will be pulled out by incurring the displeasure of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 129] =====
an

I

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 115
the rulers or they will thrash him well.

If{M, K, and lord of 2:occupy birth sign or the lords of
2and 6 occupy birth sign, or K and Gulika occupy
12th- house, there will be constant pain in the ears or
his ears will cut off.

If S is in 6 and K in birth sign the person will have
his nose cut off.

. If C is aspected by M and the birth sign is aspected

by R and S and not aspected by good planets, the
person will have his ears cut off.

. If T, M and R occupy 7 the man will be bitten by a

10.

11.

18.

18.

cobra.

. If B oecupies one of the houses of G, and K occupies

one of the houses of M the person will be killed in
a jungly by a tiger. ,

If C and M occupy one of the houses of 9 the person
will be killed by a sword.

If K isin 9 and M, T and RB ara in combination the
person will be killed by arrows or similar;weapons.

. If G is in the birth with the lord of the 3rd, there is

constant fear from quadrupeds. If the birth sign
is a watery one there is fear from aquatic animals,

If debilitated planets occupy 3 and defeated planets
occupy 6, without being aspected by good ones
there is danger from poison.

If 4 is occupied by debilitated and defeated planets
and 6 becomes a watery sign, the man will be
drowned in tanks, rivers, or other watery places.

If the lord of the birth is powerless, and occupies 4
with debilitated Ror other evil planets, and the
lord of the 4th is weak and in conjunction with
watery planets the man will have a watery grave.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 130] =====
116 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

25.

If the lord of 1 is with the lord of 4, and occupies 4
and is aspected by the lord of 10 the man will have
a watery grave.

If the lord of the house occupied by the lord of 4 is
aspected by or is in conjunction with the lord of
4 he dies by drowning

If Rand K are in 4 aspected by or in conjunction
with the lord of the 4th or 10th the person will be
stoned to death or will die by falling on a stone
or a stone falling on him.

Tf the lord of 4 isin conjunction with M and T as-
pected by K without the sight of good planets the
person will die from a similar misfortune.

If Vis birth sign with R in it, and M is in 7 the per-
son will become a widower. Here though he mar-
ries often, he will send all his wives to the grave
before he proceeds there himself.

Tf V is birth sign with R in it, and K is in 5 the man
will see all bis children dead.

2. 1f M, K and R are in 4 and 8 from S the wife of the

person will be burned to death before him

. If S is between two powerful evil planets, the wife of

the person will die beforo him by a fall from an
elevated place.

. IfS is not with good planets, or has not their aspect,

the man’s wife will die from wounds inflicted by
bandages or ropes.

If 12 and 6 are occupied one by Rand the other by
C, the person as well as his wife will have each
one eyo only,

If 9 or 5 is eccupied by Rand S the person will have:
a limblegy wife, that is his wife will have some de-
fect in one of her organs. —

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 131] =====
27.

28.

29.

30.

33.

34.

35.

36.

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 117

lf M.is in birth’sign, with S in the last Navamsa of
Cr, So, P and occupies 7, while no good planets are
found in 5, the person’s wife will be barren. Here
if he marries asecond wife he will beget children.

Weak C in 5 and all the evil planets are in 7, 12
and 1 the person will have neither wife nor chil-
dren.

If C isin 10, S in 7, and evil planets in 4, the person
will lose all his children during his life.

If S and K are in 7 aspected by evil planets the per-
son will be blind during nights.

. If € occupies any one of the Navamsas of K and is in

conjunction with evil planets, the person will have
some incurable disease in the private organs.

2. {£ Sand M are in 12 and 2, Cin birth sign and R in

7 the person will be affected by white leprosy.

If C is in 10, K in 7 and M in 2 from R, the man will
have defective organs.

If C is between K and M and Risin Cs, the man will
be subjected to any one of the following diseases,
hard beathing, dispepsia, consumption, enlarge-
ment of glands in the left side of the stomach or
enlarged spleen.

1f R is in Cr, or C is in Lo, or if Rand C exchange
their mutual Navamsas the person will have con-
sumption.

If C oceupies 5th Navamsa of Ss, or occupying any
one cf the signs she joins the Navamsas of P, Cr,
Cs, or A, and is aspected by or is in conjunction
with M, or K, the person suffers from leprosy, if
Cis aspected by good planets the person suffers
from cutaneous eruptions.

. If So, Cr, Ts, and Cs, become Sth or 9th honses from

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 132] =====
118 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

48.

44,

45

46.

47.

the birth sign and are aspected by or in conjunc-
tion with evil planets, the man will be affected by
leprosy.

If R, C, K, and M in any order occupy 8 ,6, 2, and 12
the person will lose his sight by that disease which
is attributed to the most powerful among the said
planets.

If R, C, K. and M occupy in any order 9, 11, 38 and5
without the aspect of good planets the man will
become blind by that disease which is attributed
to the most powerfal planet. ^

J£ evil planets occupy 7 without the aspect of good
ones the man suffers from tooth-ache.

If C with T occupies birth sign, and M and K occupy
trienes, the person will be possessed with devils.

If R with T occupy 1 and M and K are in trienes the
man becomes perfectly blind.

If M is in 7 aud G is in 1, the person will constantly
suffer from flatulence.

If K is in 7 and G is in 1 the person will suffer from

brain disease or mental derangement.

lf Mis in 1 and K occupies 5, 9, or 7 the man will
suffer from a similar derangement.

If C with M occupies 12 the person will be subjected
to a similar complaint,

lf the lord of the Navamsa occupied by C, C herself
R, and G occupy the Navamsas of the planets in
whose house they are debilitated or occupy un-
friendly Navamsas the person will become a slave.
Here there are 3 kinds (1) if one of the plancts
occupies such a position the man will sell himself
for food, (2) if two planets occupy such position
he will be sold asa slave by others (3) if threc

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 133] =====
43.

48,

50.

56.

a
~

‘ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 119

or more planets occupy such fositicn he will be
born of slave parents.

If Ts, A, or So is birth sign and is aspected by evil
planets the person will have very ugly teeth.

If Ss, Ts, A, As, Lo. or Cs, becomes the birth sign
_aspected by evil planets, the man becomes bald-
headed and appears uncouth.

If Ris ind or 9 aspected by evil planets he will be
sand-blind or will have bad sight.

. If M occupies 5 or 9 aspected by evil planets the

person will suffer from a host of complicated di-
seases.

. I£K occupies 5 or 9 aspected by evil planets the

person will suffer from the loss cf limbs or will have
defective organs.

. If birth sign is A, Ts, or Ss, and evil planets occupy

in any order 5, 2, 9 and 12, the person will be im-
prisoned and fastened by stout ropes or chains.

. If birth sign is Gi, V, L, or As and evil planets occu-

py 2,5, 9, and 12 in any order the man will be
heavily chained and imprisoned.

. If Cr, Cs, or P, is birth sign and evil planets occupy

5, 2, 6 and 12 in any order the person will be im-
prisoned and chained in an inaccessible tower or
place

If So is birth sign with evil planets in 2, 5, 9 and 12
the man will be confined in an unwholesome under-
ground dungeon

If C is with M the man becomes a quarrelsome fellow,
if C is with M and aspected by K he becomes an
idiot, and if C has the ring round it at the time of
birth joined by M and aspected by K he will suffer
from consumption.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 134] =====
120 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

58. If R, K, and M are in 10 with the aspect of good
planets the person becomes a cooly. When one of
the above planets is in 10 without the aspect of
good planets the person becomes a chief among
coolies or what we call a maistry or contractor,
when two planets occupy 10 without good aspect
the man will be an ordinary cooly, when there are
3 planets without good aspect in 10 he becomes a
cooly of the worst class.

59. If K is in 8 with M, or aspected by him, the person
will have his head cut off in battle.

60. 1f Cs or Asis birth sign with Tin it or is in Lo,
the person will lose his head in battle.

CHAPTER V.
PLANETS IN DIFFERENT HOUSES.

The signification of the planets in different houses is
here given. I have made the language and symbols as
concise as possible with a view to make the book handy,
and when the planets are marked against the numbers, it
means that planets in those houses produce the results
therein marked.

R in 1.—bilious, short sighted, lazy in the transaction of
work, intelligent. fond of daring deeds, over-
heated constitution, generally healthy in after life,
unkind to fellow creatures, successful in political
life, careless of reputation, danger from fever in
the 3rd year after birth, capricions. If the birth
sign is A with R there the person becomes very
wealthy and will have a little defective sight, If
the birth sign is Lo with R there, the person will

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 135] =====
(16) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 121

be night-blind, if Cr the person. will have some
mole or mark in the eyes, and if L, the person will
be born blind and poor.

R in 2.—Ugly or disfigured face, losses from prosecutions
or fines, misappropriation of government property,
angry, stubborn, danger in the 25th year from
losses, if aspected by good planets there will be
much wealth and god education, and eyesight ;
otherwise the sight will be defective.

R in 3.—Courageous, famous, intelligent, many cousins,
few brothers, wealthy and successful life, danger
in the 5th year from quadrupeds.

R in 4.—Defective organs, much anxiety,hater of relations,
success in foreign country, short life for mother,
heated constitution, very successful in the 22nd
year, quarrelsome, unhappy. good reputation.

R in 5.—Poor, childless or few children, heart disease,
stout, danger to father in the 7th year, indifferent
to cast prejudices, corpulance,

R in 6.— intelligent, careless of caste distinctions, warlike,
bold, licentious, family composed of children and
grandchildren, easy victory over foes, wealthy, eye
disease during the 20th year, in after life great
gains from former enemies.

R in 7.—Man of loose morals, hated by the fair sex, late
marriage, submissive to wife, fond of travelling.
acquisition of wealth through female agency, fond
of eating in others houses, wife’s character rather
questionable, if good planets aspect, she will be
virtuous, fair, and will have erect breast, bilious in
temparament, two wives, eating things prohibited.

Rin 8.—Few children, long life, complaint in eyes, sores
in the head in the 10th year, weak constitution, un-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 136] =====
122 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

charitable.

R in 9.—Fond of sublime subjects, charitable, godly, little
wealth, few children, little patromony, self acqui-
red property, many lands, glandular disease.

R in 10.—F amous,clever in the art of acquiring wealth,su-
perior knack, healthy, educated, highly courageous
fond of music, fine taste, good children, founder
of villages or colonies, commanding much personal
influence, successful military or political, career.

Rin 11.—Mach wealth, many vehicles, steady and per-
severing in any undertaking,good reputation,many
political enemies, man of principles, healthy.

R in 12.—Poor,thief,adulterous among widows, tall person,
unscrupulous conduct, careless of reputation.

C in 1.—Handsome but sickly, stout body, flatulence,
disease in private organs and ears, educated, many
brothers, fits, mental derangement, stubborn. dan-
ger from drowning. In Cr, C makes a man wealthy,
in A, C gives many children, in Ts, C gives excel-
lent position and great wealth.

C in.2.—Handsome countenance, charming eyes, highly
intelligent,’ wealthy, breaks in education, great
respect in government, good family, sweet speech.

C in 3.—Dispeptic complaint,piles, not suckled by mother,
fine sisters, thin body, impious, many brothers,
educated, courageous, cruel,

C in 4.—Fine taste, high education, polite manners, good
houses, horses and furniture, many relations, much `
wealth, happy, licentious, protector of many per-
sons, good mother.

C in 5.—Many horses and cattle, handsome wife, shrewd,
showy, imperfect education, many daughters,

C in 6.—Lazy, submissive to females, tender body, weak

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 137] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELE INSTRUCTOR. 123

sexual connection, fond of widows, poor, drunkard,
pilfering habits, suckled by strangers, imperious,
intelligent, weak stomach, many foes.

C in 7,—Fond of women, blood-thirsty, handsome wife,
good family, pains in the groins, when aspected by
evil planets two wives, narrow minded, jealous, full
of sexual energy.

C in 8.—Unsteady,unhealthy, few children, mother short
lived, maternal disagreement, bilious, lean body,
bad sight

C in 9.—Lover of stories, intelligent, builder of tanks,tem-
ples and charitable places,good children,godly, many
lands, gold, popular, friends, relations, wealthy.

Uin 10.—Charitable, bold, shrewd, enjoying the fruits
of his labour, fond of widows, adulterous, business
tact, long life, successful, respect for. elders and
priests, wealthy.

Cin 11.—Well informed, philonthropic, literary taste,
polite, wealthy, good cultivation, charitable, man
of principles.

C in 12.—Mean habits, constant hearing of evil news,
many relations, defective organs, narrow minded.
cruel

K in 1.—Burn or scar in body, overheated constitution,

thievish habits, corpulance, good complexion, res-
pected, danger to father.

K in 2.—Short temper, extravagant and immoral, breaks
in education, large patrimony in lands and jewels.

K in 8.—Few brothers, intelligent, very bold, adulterous,
as also the wife, tond of dancing girls,adventurous,
unpopular, many cousins.

K in 4.—Danger to parents, sickly mother,family quarrels
good conveyances, dependent on others, brutal,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 138] =====
124 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

murderer of women.

K in 5.—Childless, incurring government displeasure,
unpopular,

K in 6.—Wealthy, good lands, conquest over enemies,
good political life, intelligent, secret enemies.

K in 7.—Sickly wife passing blood or suffering from piles,
disease in hands, many brothers and maternal
uncles, intelligent.

K in 8.—Few issues, bad sight, short life,danger to father,
grand father and maternal uncles, fond of dancing
women, widower in after life.

K in 9.—Loss from cultivation, sickly father, cruel dis-
position, dependant life, merchandize in boats and
ships and gains thereby.

XK in 10.—Clever in getting wealth, sound health, famous,
founder of towns or colonies, self acquired property,

_ good cultivation and profit.

K in 11.—Well informed, many lands, very shrewd in bu-
siness, many elder brothers,self acquired property.

K in 12.—poor, rotten body, cheat, unpopular, loss of
wife, if with Kt incendiary habits.

B in 1.—learned, well informed, fond of magic and astro-
nomy, able to exorcise spirits, fond of mathematics
and poetry, respected long life. `

B in 2.—Many issues, religionist, sweet speech, wealthy,

. self acquired property,fond of storing grain, steady
in gaining his object.

B in 3.—Happy, fortunate in women, many brothers,often
cruel.

B in 4.—Learned, intelligent mother, skilled in thesleights
of hand, polite,obliging,careless in keeping carriages
é& animals and showing no taste in their selection.

B in 5.—Danger to maternal uncles, sickly parents, poli-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 139] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 125

tical respect, quarrelsome, showy, fond of clothes
of all kinds.

B in 6.—Breaks in education, foeless, respectadle, short
tempered, cunning, danger to mother, losses in
money, disease in toes and fingers.

B in 7.—Skilled in religious lore, happy mother, many
carriages and horses, good health, adulterous, cha-
ritable.

B in 8.—Respectable long life, obliging, few issues, many
lands.

B in 9.—Obliging, fond of musical instruments, highly
licentious, pretending to be holy, many issues.

B in 10.—Fortunate, enjoyment in life, founder of chari-
ties, good name, intelligent, perforoming sacrifices,
bad sight, renouncing worldly pleasures in after

life,

B in 11.—Many lands, wealth, happiness, mathematical
faculty.

B in 12.—Intelligent, adulterous. capricious, obliging,
danger to mother, few children, living in others
houses.

G in 1.—Learned, grammarian or philologist, many chil-
dren, political success, long happy life, great res-
pect, skillful in various arts, stout and majestic

. body, golden locks and eyes.

G in 2.—Handsome person, charming eyes, intelligent
wealthy, eloquent, good wife and family, witty
and humorous in conversation, enjoyable life,
great influence among relations.

G in 3.—Many brothers, miserly, polite professions, un-
scrupulous of the means employed in gaining his
object, favourable to cultivation, protecting only
very close relations,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 140] =====
126 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

G in 4—Happy, wealthy, educated, good carriages and
horses, helper of relations, fond of building houses,
good mother, many cattie.

G in 5.—Handsome and broad eyes, minister, dewan or
commander, few children, very intelligent, skillful
in mercantile work, eclipsed by the success of his
son.

G in 6.—Many cousins and grand children, foeless, witty
and humorous, licentious, dispeptic or weak diges-
tion.

G in 7.—eclipsing his father in wealth and success, rich
marriage, very sensitive, fond of good name, suc-
cess in cultivation, if aspected by evil planets wife
faithless.

G in 8.—Mean minded, drunkard, widower, pains in sto-
mach, teacher of servants, pretending to be chari-
table and misappropriating such funds, long life,
dirty habits.

G in 9.—Benevolent, god-fearing, many issues, perfor-
ming many religious sacrifices, wealthy, long life to
father, educated.

G in 10.—Learned, clever in the acquisition of wealth,
wealthy, great respect, many lands, good vehicles
and horses, many children, governor of villages,
many servants and maids, steady and paying
cultivation.

G in 11.—Professor of music, horses and elephants, very
wealthy, charitable and god-fearing, dependant
elder brothers. °

G in 12.—Cruel, poor, few issues, connection with women
and prostitutes, enlargement of spleen and glands,
displaying great taste. in selection of beds, cots,
women and modes of enjoyment of life, charitable

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 141] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 127

among deserving members,sanyasi,pious in after life.

S in 1—Mathematician, long life, fond of wife, jewels,
clothes, scents, flowers and women, skilled in the
art of sexual enjoyment.

8 in 2.—Handsome, large ‘and fair eyes, big family, luxu-
rious food, charming wife, happy, hater of women,
fond of fine arts, obliging, agreeable manners, edu-
cated, author and poet.

Sin 3.—Many prospering brothers, obliging but not
spending money, healthy.

S in 4.—Good eater, learned, intelligent, kind mother,
many cattle and horses, fond of milk, relatives,
lands and cultivation, successful, popular, famous.

S in 5—Intelligent, statesmanly ability,danger to mother,
commander, educated, many children, chiefly
daughters.

S in 6.—Foeless, many cousins, very licentious, constant
venereal complaints, grand children, well-informed,
fond of women of all kinds.

§ in 7.—Skilled in the art of adultery, fond of women and
condescending to kiss their sexual organs, adopting
questionable means to gain his ends, thoroughly,
licentious, wealthy, enjoying sensual pleasures, if
with M the wife will also be faithless.

S in 8.—Happy, danger to mother, celebrated, short life
wealthy to the end of life, godly in after life, unscru-
pulous in the commencemext, pious before death,

S in 9.—Religious, respect for elders,, commander of in-
fantry, sharp in business, fond of teachers and
priests. ` ` ^

§ in 10.—Breaks in education, god-fearing, few elder bro-
thers, good horses and vehicles.

§ in 11.—Learned, wealthy, many lands and much culti-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 142] =====
128 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

vation, good conveyances.

S in 12.—Fond of women, adultery among low women,
miserly, wealthy, sweet promises and sad _ perfor-
mances.

M in 1.—Loss of childern, evil natured, unscrupulous, in-
curring king’s displeasure, bad citizen, insignifi-
ficant life, flatulence, adultery among low women,
fond of drinks. If the birth sign is L, Ss, Cs, As
and P with M in it the person commands respect,
wealth, becomes a Presidency or Town Magistrate,
educated and of comely appearance though dark.

M in 2.—Loging wealth, two wives, few lands, diseased
face, breaks in education, adulterous, drunkard,
stammering.

M in 3.—Loss of brothers, polite, obliging, cruel-hearted,
many servants, courageous, fond of ladies, good
cultivation.

M in 4.—Two mothers, cholic pains, miserable, not open
hearted, fond of oily seedsand dark grains, political
disfavour, good patrimony, success in foreign con-
tries, incestuous intercourse.

M in 5.—Issueless, adoption, evil minded, tale bearer, vil-
lage hfe, criminal prosecutions. When this sign is
common he is sure to have an adopted son.

M in 6.—Few cousins, deafness, stubborn, foeless, wealthy,
few issues, quarrelsome, fond of women, suffering
from complicated diseases.

M in 7.—Sickly, many wives, fond of prostitutes, travel-
ling, sponge, cheat, cholic pains, deafness or pain
inears. In conjunction with S the wife also be-
comes unchaste.

M in 8.—Long sexual organs, corpulent, poor, adultery
with low caste women, drunkard, servile work, few

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 143] =====
(17) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 129

children, bad sight, leprosy, expansion of glands,
seducing family women. With S travelling, adul-
terous, with K danger by drowning, with T danger
by weapons or poison, with Rand T impious, not
performing paternal ceremonies, ever thinking of
adultery, hard breathing,passingblood consumption,
asthma, few brothrs, scandles in wife’s family, dis-
nonestly earned mouey, worthless sons, long life.

M in 9.—Miserly, wearing torn or old graments, cons-
tructing tanks, chatrams and temples, danger to
paternal aunts, irreligious, unfilial.

M in 10.— Bathing in the Ganges and other holy rivers, bi-
lious, fond ofagriculture, village or town magistrate,
miserly, forsaking his own country and finding
livelihood in a foreign country.

M in 11.—Exceedingly wealthy, many lands, great politi-
cal respect, breaks in education, no elder brothers
or paternal uncles, good horses and vehicles.

M in 12.—Learned, defective organs, skillful in arts, squint
eyes, giving money for evil purposes, if with an
evil planet danger to eyes.

T in 1.—Childless, abortions, courageous, if-he is in A,
Ts, Gi, Cr, Lo, V and Cs. results are not so
unfavourable.

T in 2.— Healthy growth, little wealth, bad sight, loss, of
children, two wives, short temper, close fisted.

T in 3.—Millionaire, few issues, bold, many brothers,
adventurous and warlike, many cousins, ear affec-
tions.

T in 4.—Breaks in education, fond of foreign languages,
many jewels and clothes, two wives, a willing sub-
ordinate,two mothers,with S incestuousintercourse.

T in 5.—Loss of children, vomiting disease,cruel-hearted,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 144] =====
130 ASTROLOGICALSELFINSTRUCTOR.

getting into hot water with superiors, displeasure
of government, residence in insignificant villages.

T in 6.—Loss in women, murders enemies, wealthy, foe-
less, many cousins, fond of low caste women, venere-
al disease, happy.

T in 7.—Two wives, Ist wife suffering from passing large
quantities of blood,2nd wife from dyspepsia or enlar-
ged spleen. adultery among widows, diabetes, fond
of drinks

T in 8—Mean-minded, quarrelsome, danger in the 32nd
year if in conjunction with evil planets, death in
the 56th year if with good planets, immoral.

T in 9.—Impious, uncharitable, careless of the future, sub-
issive to women. few children, good subordinate,
drunken habits.

T ia 10.—Conniection with widows. wealthy, man of fine
taste, fond-of poetry, painting and dramas, tra-
-veller, disease from flatulence.

T in 1.—Many friends, elder sisters and brothers, adult-
erous, favor among Mahomedan and Tarkish ru-
lers, good cultivation, many children, storing of
grain.

T in 12.—Miserly, few children, defective vision, money
losses.

Kt in 1.—Pains in loins, leprous palms, emaciated figure,
weak constitution, graceless manners, disease from
poisonous effects, excessive heat, piles, fond of
women, intelligeut

Kt in 2.—Short temper but sweet tongue, cruel heart,
breaks in education.

Kt in 3.—Very popular, adventurous, many relations, no
younger brothers, fond of gems. wealthy.

Kt in 4.—Complaints from poison, quarrelsome, weak,sick-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 145] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR, | 131

ly mother, licentious.

Kt in 5.—Tender head, liberal, sinful, eldest issue female,
loss of children, fond of drinks and women.

Kt in 6.—Rise in the long run, agreeable conversation,
admired by women, licentious, venereal ‘disease.

Kt in 7.—Connection with maid servants or women serv-
ing as sweepers, nurses and attendants, very pas-
sionate, sickly wife, committing secret sins, search
after widows.

Kt in 8.—Sanguine, little intelligence, bad eyes, few chil-
dren, senseless quarrels, ruin to women.

Kt in 9.—Blind orshort-sighted, impious, liar,blessed with
children, relations and: friends.

Kt in 10.—Jolly, enjoying life in all its phases, bad re-
lations, baths in the Ganges and other holy rivers.

Kt in 11.—Many friends, wealthy, intelligent, courageous,
respect among all classes.

Kt in 12.—Fickle minded, bad sight, residence in foreign
country, low favourites, constant travelling, for-
saking the native country, obtaining final emanci-
pation or Moksham.

CHAPTER VI.
COMBINATIONS FOR SOVERFIGNTY.

I shall briefly point out a few conbinations which
give royal power. In séme of these conjunctions the
power will be attained only by those that are born in
royal families and in others persons born in the midst of
poverty and destitution rise to kingly power by their own
perseverance or energy. Such distinctions are indicated
in their suitable places.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 146] =====
132 “ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

1, If R, G, M, and K are exalted, and one of the places
of their exaltation becomes birth sign the person
becomes a king irrespective of birth and surround-
ings. ,

2. If 3 planets are exalted the person becomes a king if
born in royal families, otherwise he becomes a great
statesman. .

3. If B, G, and M are exalted, with birth sign in any one
of their houses of exaltation, or if G, Mand K are
exalted with birth sign ia any one of their places of
exaltation, if R, K, and M are exalted with birth
sign in any one of their exalted places. or if R, G,
and K with birth sign in any one of their exalted
houses, persons born under such influences will be-
come kings according to the nature of the planets.
If the exalted planets are evil the king becomes a
tyrant, if good planets are exalted he becomes good,
and if good and evil planets are exalted he will be
partly good and partly bad.

4. If R and @ are exalted and C is in Cr, with birth sign
in A or Cr, the man will be a king.

5. If the birth is in A, Cr or L andR, C, and M are exal-
ted, or if R and K aro exalted, with Cin Cr, and
with birth sign in A, Cs, or Cr the person becomes a
king. .

6. If G and C are in Cr, and K is in Cs, with birth sign
in them, or if Gand C are in Cr, and M is in L,
with birth sign in them the child beoomes a mo-
narch.

. IfC isin Cr. Min L, and Kin Cs. or if birth sign
isin A with R, and C in Cr, or birth sign Cr, with
C and G in it, or birth sigan L with K and C in Cr
or birth sign Cs with K and C in Cr, in all these

न

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 147] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 133

cases the person becomes a king if born in a royal
family,or a rich and influential gentleman or states-
man if born in other families whether poor or rich.

8. If the Vargottama Navamsa of any sign—in each zodia-
cal sign if the birth Navamsa falls in the sign it-
self it becomes Vergottamamsa, in A the 1st Na-
vamsa, in Ts the 5th Navamaa, in Gi the 9th Na-
vamsa or the Ist Navamsas of moveable, the 5th
Navamsas of fixed, and 9th Navamsas of common
signs become Vergottamana vamsas—or C is aspec-
ted by four or more planets the person becomes a
mighty king.

9. If the birth sign is in As, A or Ts, and M in As. Rin
A, C in Ts, Bin Gi, and K-in So, the person be-

. comes a king.

10. If M and S are in L, C in Ts, B and R in V, G in Cr
K in A with birth in L or ls, or if Mand K in Ca,
and R and C are in Ss, the man becomes a power-
ful king.

11, If Cs igs birth with K and C in it, and R is in Ss, or
if A is birth with R in it, Cand M in L, G in 8s,
the person becomes a monarch.

12. 1f Ts is birth with C in it, R in Lo, G in So, M in As,
or if Cs is birth with M in it,C in P, Kin Gi, B
-in V, G ia 8s, or if P is birth with S in it, G@ and
C in Ss, K in Cs, B in V, or if V is birth with B
in it, Gand C in Ss, K in Cs, and SinP, in all
these cases the person becomes a great king if
born in royal families ora great statesman and
wealthy if born in other families.

13. If V is birth with B in it, M and Kin Cs, Cand Gin
Ss, the person becomes a great ruler even when
born in poor families.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 148] =====
184 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

14, If P is birth with C, Min As, K in Cs, Rin Lo, or
if A is birth with K, G in Cr, the man becomes a
raler even when he belongs to a poor family.

15. If Cr is birth with G, R in A, C, S and B in Ts, or if
Cs is birth with M, K in A, C in Cr, R in Lo, Bin
-Gi, S in L, or if V is birthjwith B in it, S in Gi, C
and G in P. M and K in Cs, or if birth is A with
R in it, C and K in Cs, G in Ss. M in As, the per-
son becomes a king if born in royal families, other-
wise he will become a great politician and an
eminent statesman,

16, If As is birth, S in T's,C in L,and other planets in any
order in As, 8s and A, or if Cr is birth Sin L, C
in P, and other planets in any order in V, Cr,

and Ts, or if powerful B occupies birth sign, S or
G in 9, and other planets in any order in 2, 3, 6,9
10, and 10, the person becomes a king if born in
royal families. or else a great man and he will be
benevolent, wealthy and famous.

17. If Ts is birth with C,S in Gi,M in L,R K Band S in P,
or if C is in 10, M in 11, Gin birth sign, Band K
in 2,S and Rin 4, the person becomes a great
king or statesman as the case may be.

18. K and M in birth, Cin 4, G in 7,8 in 9, Rin 10,B
in 11, will make a person of the royal family a king,

- any other man an exalted statesman. -

A few observations willbe made to enable the stu-
dent to guide him in making predictions as to the exact
time when a person gets kingly power, and the time
when he loses it. The planet-in the birth sign or that in
the 10th will influence the man to get royal power. Suppose
there are two'or more planets in each of these houses,
then find out the strongest planet and predict suceess du-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 149] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 135

ring his Dasa or Vidasa. When there are’no planets in
lor 10,the kingdom will be acquired when the sub-
period of the most powerful planet arrives. As for the
loss of the royal power the period of the planet who occu-
pies an unfriendly house, or who is debilitated must be
fixed as that during which the person gets dethroned, if
the planets are really powerless they take away the royal
power altogether but if they are partly powerful they give
him a temporary banishment or loss of power and then
by means of friendly help from other rulers, enable him
to regain his kingdom.

If Ts, Cr, Gi, V, L, Ss, and P are occupied by good
planets and form quadrants and the remaining signs
owned by evil planets are occupied by their lords, the
pereon will become a great leader of dacoits or robbers.
and will have wealth and personal influence with many.

CHAPTER VII.

SIGNIFICATION OF THE SIGNS.
FIRST HOUSE. :

1 If the lord of the birth is exalted, well associated, occu-
pies quadrants, has the aspect of good planets,is in
his or his friendly Navamsas the man will have
health, majestic appearance, great command and
general happiness.

2. If the lord of birth is debilitated, has evil conjunction
or aspect, is weak or occupies unfavourable Na-
vamsas the person will have bad health,emaciated

: body,constant sickness and general misery.

3. evil planets are in birth with T, or if the lord of the
birth is in conjunction with malefics, the porson ©
will be often cheated and will suffer from thieves

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 150] =====
136 ASTROLOGICAL SBLF INSTRUCTOR.

and robbers

4 If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the
birth is in conjunction with T, K, M or any ons
of them when powerfal, the person will have en-
larged testicles; If T is with the lord of the Na-
vamsa occupied by the lord of the birth house there
will be similar complaint.

5 If K and lord of birth are together in it with evil planets
or have their aspect the person will have scar or
cut in the head, will fall from or against a rock or
receive some cuts from sharp weapons.

6. If birth-is occupied by good planets aspected by good
but not by evil planets the person will be stout,
specially so if the birth is a watery sign.

7. Rin birth aspected by K gives asthma, consumption,
dyspepsia or enlarged spleen.. K in birth aspected-
by R or M gives sword cuts. Kt in birth aspec-
ted by malefics gives nightmares, fear of devils
hobgoblins and troubles from thieves.

8. If birth is movable with its lord in a similar sign, the
person becomes a great traveller. If birth is
movable, its lord in a movable Navamsa, the lord:
of this Navamsa isin a movable sign aspected by
& planet in another movable sign, he becomes a
great traveller and acquires immense wealth in
foreign lands.

9. If malefics join or aspect birth, T is in 10, or debilita--
ted planet occupies birth aspected by R the person
becomes unpopular, cruel and unhappy.

10. Good planets in birth, malefics in 2 and quadrants and
the lord of birth is in good Navamsa the person
suffers poverty in the commencement and gains
much wealth and good position in after life.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 151] =====
(18) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 137

SECOND HLOUSE.

11 lf T, M, or K is with the lord of birth, ho suffers
from eye complaints. If B joins the lord of birth
and is in 6 there will be eye disease.

12. If B is lord of birth and is in quadrants or good hou-
ses or is exalted or in good conjunction he becomes
charitable, eloquent, protector_of large families and
will have good sight. ~

13. If G@ is with the lord of 2 or the latter is aspected by
BorS and occupies good houses the person becomes
a powerful speaker, rich man, protector of families
and commander of many persons.

14, If the lord of 2 is debilitated or is aspected by or in
conjunction with malefics, and the lord of birth is
weak the man becomes a poor and helpless fellow.

15. If the lord of 2 is exalted occupies quadrants or
trienes and the lord of the house where the owner
of 2 is placed also occupies quadrants the person
commands many people.

16. If the lord of 2 is exalted and is aspected by or is in
conjunction with G he protects thousands of people.

17. If the lord of 2 is in quadrants aspected by benefics,
and good planets occupy the same he will have
good face and eyes.

18. If malefics are in 2 and its lord is with bad planets or
is debilitated the person has ugly face.

19, If malefics are with the lord of 2 and occupy 12 andevil
planets aspect him the person becomes dumb or
will have defective speech.

20. If the lord of 2 is with malefics, or in 10 with deblilita-
ted R, or Rand M are in 2, ha becomes nervous

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 152] =====
138 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR,

and never commands the respect of the audience.

21. B in quadrants, the lord of 2 is powerful, and S is in
2, they muke a man love sublime sciences and a
proficient in astrology

22. If K is in 2 aspected by B or C with Binthe quad-
rants he becomes a great mathematician. If thelord
of 2 joins B in the quadrants, G in birth sign, and
M in 8, or if G occupies quadrants or trienes, S is
exalted, and the lord of 2 is with B, the person be-
comes a clever mathematician.

28. (a) If the lord of 2 is with Gand S aspected by R
and K ard occupies good signs he becomes a
clever logician. Jf & and lord of 2 are power-
ful and are aspected by K and S the person
becomes a great grammarian or philologist.

(b) If the lord of 2and B are exalted, M is in Gopu-
ramsa, or G is in Simhasanamsa, or if G and
B occupy together quadrants and M is in Pa-
ravatamsa, the person becomes a celebrated
theologion or religionist.

24, If G and S occupy quadrants, the lord of 2 in Simha-
sanamsa or Gopuramsa and B is in the Navamsa of
the lord, the person becomes professor of several
branches of learning or Pundit in 6 shastrams.

25. If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by R is in 2 and
is powerful and the lord of 2 isin Visashikamsa
he becomes a wit und humourist. If the lord of 1 is
in 2, good planets in 1 or its lord in Paravatamsa
the person will be versed in the Vedasor religious
lore.

26. (a) If the lord of 2 is with the lord of birth aspected

by the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of 10, or if, the lord of 2 is with the lord

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 153] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 13)

of 9, aspected by the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of 1, the man becomes
very rich.

(b) If the lord of 2 is with the lord of 9, occupies
quadrants aspected by benefics, or if benefics
occupy 1, 2, |1, or their Jords occupy good
houses aspected by the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of 2 the man becomes
evormously rich at an early age.

(c) If the lord of 1 is in 2, and the lord of 2 is in 11
with the lord of 11 in 1 the person comesacross
hidden treasures. 1f the lord of birth is with
Gand occupies quadrants, and the lord of 2
is in Visashakamsa, the person acquires much
property by self exertions,

(d) If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord
of birth joins well with the lord of 2 and occu-
pies quadrants or trienes the person will bave
much self acquired property. Ifthe lords of
1, 2,11 join together occupying quadrants or
trienes aspected by benefics the man will have
much wealth in middle life.

(e) If the lords of 1, 2, 3 join together, aspected by
male planets or if the lord of 3 is in 2 aspected
by or is in conjunction with K he will have
money from brothers.

(f) Ifthe lord of birth aspects the lord of 2 occupy
ing quadr ants or good Navamsas the person
earns much by self exertion. If the lord of 2
is in conjunction with or aspected by the lord

of 4 he gets wealth from mother. If the lord
of 2 is with the lord of 5 and G is aspected by

the lord of 1, the person gets wealth from

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 154] =====
140

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

children. I£ the lord of 7 is with the lord of

2 and is aspected by S the person gets money
from wife. If the lord of 6 is with the lord of 2
occupying quadrants or trienes, and aspected
by powerful planets the person gets much
wealth from his enemies. If the lord of 1 ia
weak, joins with malefics and occupies 12 and
the lord of 2 with Ris debilitated, the person
loses his wealth by fines and confiscations.

(g) If the lord of 12 isin 2, the lord of 11 in 12,

and the lord of 2 is in 3, 6, 12 the person loses
by fines and penalties. If the lords of 2 and
12 occupy 12 or 2 aspected by the lord of 1 the
person loses money by king’s displeasure. If
the lords of 2 and 11 are aspected by K and
occupy bad houses or Navamsas the man loses
wealth by king’s displeasure, by thieves or by
fire. If the lord of the Navamsas occupied by
the lord of 2 is in 3,6, 12 with malefics the
person becomes pieless. If the lords of 2, 12,
11 are unfavourably situated, aspected by or
in conjunction with malefics the man becomes
destitute.

(h) If the lord of the Navamsas occupied by the lord

of 12 is with the lord of 2 or is aspected by
him, and malefics occupy quadrants the person
becomes very poor. If malefics occupy 2,
its lord is in 12 and the lord of 10 is with the
lord of 11 or 1s aspected by him the person
gets into hopeless debt. 1fthe lord of 2 is
debilitated or is with R and evil planets occupy
2 and 8 the person will have heavy liabilities.
If the lord of 2, the lord of 6 and the lord of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 155] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 141

11 occupy quadrants or trienes the man will
be free from debt.

THIRD HOUSE.

27. If the lord of 3 and K are in 12 aspected by malefics
or if K occupies 8 aspected by evil planets, or if
evil planets occupy 3 aspected by malefics or if the
lord of 3 is between two bad planets, or if 3 is bet-
ween two evil planets aspected by or joined with
them without good aspect brothers will die.

28. If the lord of 3 is debilitated, if it is occupied by M or
aspected by evil planets, or if, the 3rd as well as
its lord is between evil planets withont good aspect
brothers die. If the lord of 8 or K occupies 3, 6,
12 without good aspect, there will be no brothers.
If the lord of 3 is with T or Kt and occupies un-
favourable positions, he will have all his brothers
dead in his early days. 1f good planets occupy 3
aspected by good planets and its lord is in a good
position the person will have many brothers. and
they will be successful

29. If the lord of 3 is exalted, K is favourable, aspected
by cr in conjunction with good planets, brothers
will prosper. If the lord of 3 and K occupy qua-
drants or trienes with good planets or if the lord of
3 is exalted or occupies good Navamsas with good
planets, he will have many brothers. If the lord
of 8 or K is in odd signs or Navamsas aspected by
K, G, or R there will be many brothers. If the
lord of 3 or K occupies even signs there will be
many sisters.

80. If the lord of 3 is in good Navamsas with benefics, or

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 156] =====
142 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

T is similarly situated he will be bold. If the lord
of 3 is exalted, evil planets in 12, the birth sign
and Navamsa are in movable signs the person will
be courageous in battle. Ifthe lord of 3 is in 12
and T is not well situated the person will suffer
defeat. If the lord of 3 is with R he becomes
courageous, if with C he becomes bold in mind, if
with K stubborn and angry, if with good planets
thoughtful and calculating.

FOURTH HOUSE,

81. If the lord of 4 is with the lord of 1 occupying a good
place, or if the lord of 4 occupies trienes or qua-
drants aspected by benefics, or if he occupies Visa-
shakamsa, the person will own many houses. If the
lord of 9 is in quadrants, the lord of 4 exalted or
well situated, the person will have good houses well
furnished. If B is in 8, the lord of 4 is well placed
or if the lord of 4 is with the lord of 10 and M
occupies quadrants the person will own splendid
mansions or places.

82. 1f Bis lord of 4 aspected by beneficsorifG is in 4.and
its lord is with benefics there will be respect among
relations. If the lord of 4 is with evil planets, or
occupies an unfavourable position he will be neg
lected by relations. If 4 or its lord is with malefics
or aspected by them, the person will have quarrel-
some relations.

83. If 4 is movable, its lord is in a similar sign there will
be houses in several towns or villages. If the
lord of 4 is in 10 and the lord of 10 is in 4 aspected
by K, he will have many lands. If benefics occupy

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 157] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 143

4 and its lord is with benefics he will have many
lands. If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of 4,occupies quadrants or aspected by friend-
ly planets, or is with K or joins him, the person
will inherit much landed property from brothers.
If-the lord of 4 is in 7 and S is in 4 and these are
friendly to each other the person will have mach
landed property through his wife. If 4 or its lord or
K is between two evil planets without any good as-
pect the person will suffer great losses in lands.
34, Ifthe lord of 4 is with powerful G and B and occupies
quadrants, the person will be very happy and eat
luxurious food. If or C occupies 4 without any
aspect from malefics the person eats well and spends
a jolly life. `

35. If malefics occupy 4 without the aspect of benefics,
the person will spend a miserable life even when
he has much wealth. If the lord of 4 is with R or
K without the aspect of good planets, and occupies
a powerless: Navamsa the person becomes unhappy

36. 1f the lord of 4 is debilitated and joins evil planets

the person becomes sinful.

37. (a) If C and S are in quadrants, occupying bad Na-
-vamsas, and aspected by or joined with evil
planets, the man becomes guilty of intercourse
with his mother or step-mother. If C is aspec-
ted by or joins with evil planets, R occupies
quadrants,evil planets are in 4 or aspect it,the
person becomes guilty of criminal conversation
with his mother or motherly relations. If the
lord of 4 is joined with or aspected by male-
fics, and the lord of 1 joins with the lord of 7 he
will commit adultery among aunts paternal or

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 158] =====
144 . ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

maternal.

(0) If the lord of 7 is in 4 with evil planets and as-
pected by them the person will have intercourse
with sisters and similar relations. If M is in
4 aspected by or joins with malefics, the person
has connection with sisters. If the lord of 6,
K, and C occupy 4 aspected by melefics he will
have sexual intercourse with his mother-in-law.
If the lord of 4 is with T aspected by malefics,
his mother will be adulterous. IfC joins with
T or Kt and is aspected by evil planets the
man’s mother commits adultery with low men,
if C is with M aspected by malefics the
mother will have paramours among cultivat-
ing clases, if C is with B mercantile lovers, if
C is with R warrior classes, if with G or S the
mother will have priests and religious men as
her admirers. Here it is very essential to
note that the combination should be power-
fully aspected by evil planets, otherwise no
adulterous disposition should be ascribed to
the mother of the person.

(c) If the lord of 1, 4,9, and 6 join together, the
person will be born of adulterous connection.
If G does not aspect the birth or C,or if C and
R are together without good aspect the person
will be born of adulterous intercourse.

88. If the lord of 4 is powerful, C joins benefics, and good
planets are in 4 the person’s mother lives long. If
C is exalted, occupies quadrants, or is with benefics
the person’s mother will live long. If C is bet-
ween 2 evil planets, and occupies 6, 8 or 12 and the
lord of 4 is debilitated or joins malefics the child

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 159] =====
(19) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 145

becomes motherless soon.

39. If S is in 4 the person will have gold, clothes, jewels
and vehicles. If the lord of 4 is with S he will go
in palanquins. IfS joins with Gand is in the
birth the person will have different conveyances,

(a) Ifthe lords of 9,1, and 4 occupy 10, or if ‘the
lords of 1 and 10, are joined powerfully or if the
lord of 4 joins 9,S and Gare in4 and the
lord of 9 occupies quadrants or trienes, the
person will have splendid political success. If
the lord of 4 is with the lord of 9 aspected by
G and occupies 1 they predict great political
advancement. Ifthe lord of 4 is with the
lord of 9 and aspects 4, the person becomes a
great statesman.

(४) If the lord of 9 is in 11, and the lords of 4 and 1
occupy 9, or if the lord of 4 occupies quadrants
and the lord of the house occupied by the
lord of 4 is with S the person will have many
horses and carriages.

(c) If the lord of 4is in A or So, or if B is in birth
and benefics are in 9 the person will have good
position, vehicles, wealth and jewels. If the
lord of 2 is exalted, and the lord of 4 is well
situated the person becomes an eminent states-
man. If 2 is occupied by an exalted planet,
or benefics are ir quadrants, with malefics in
8, 6 and 11, the man becomes a king or his
equal in power. If the lord of 2 is in birth,
lord of 10 is in 2 and exalted planets occupy
4, or if the lords of 1, 4, 9 occupy houses which
are quadrants to each other the person becomes
a commander of horse. If 2 exalted planets

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 160] =====
146 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

occupy 10 asnected by the lord of 1 or 9 the
person commands a vast army of cavalry. If
98 is exalted,{lord of 10 is in 1 the person will
command many drums.

FIFTH HOUSE

41. (a) If the lord of 5 or the house itself is aspected by
powerful G there will be many children. If
the lord of 1 joins 5 and its lord is powerful,
G is well situated, or ifthe lord of 5 and G@
occupy Visashakamsa aspected by benefics
the person will have children.

(0) Ifthe lord of 2 is in 5, well aspected by G, or
if the lord of birth is with the lord of 5 or as-
pect each other the person will have children.
If the lords of 1 and 5 occupy quadrants with
benefics, and the lord of 2 is powerful, or if
the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord
of 5 is with a good planet or is aspected by
him, or if the lords of 1 and 9 occupy 7, and
the lord of 2 is in 1 the person will have many
children.

42. If 5 as well as its lord is placed between evil planets
and G is in company with malefics there will be
loss of children. Ifthe lords of the Navamsas
occupied by the lords of 9, 5, 7 arein conjunction
with evil planets the person will see his children
die. If the lord of 5 occupies a debilitated Navamsa
or is joind by weak, debilitated or combust planets,
aspected by malefics or occupies with melefics 3,
6, 12, his children will die. If the lord of 5 occupies
3, 6, or 12 and is aspected by malefics his children
will die.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 161] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 147

48. If C, 8 and malefics occupy respectively 10, 7, and 4

44.

45.

47.

48.

with the lord of 1 in conjunction with B, or if
malefics occupy 12, 5, 8, or if C and G occupy birth
aspected by K and M. the person’s family becomes
extinct, If all the malefics occupy 4 or if all of
them occupy 12,5, 8 and 1 the person’s family
becomes extinct.

Tf B is the lord of 5 and is with or aspected by bene-

fics, or if the lord of 5 is between two benefics or
if B is exalted or the lord of 5 is well situated and

aspected or B occupies 5 or, if the lord of the Na-
vamsa occupied by B is in quadrants aspected by
benefics, the person becomes very: intelligent. If
5 is between two good planets, G is in 5 and B is
favourable the person will have penetrating intel-
ligence.

If the lord of 1 is debilitated or is with malefics, the
person will have no intelligence. If Misin 5 or
aspects the lord of birth, or the lord of the house
occupied by Mis with evil planets there will be
derangement of the brain.

. If the lord of 5 is seen by malefics, and 5 is also as-

pected by them and is placed between two bad
planets the person suffers from heart-disease.

If the lord of 5 is in 12 or with its lord and oecupies
unfavourable houses there will be heart-disease.

If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of
5, joins with or is aspected by malefics, the per-
son suffers from disease of the heart and will be
hard-hearted.

. Ifthe lord of 5 occupies an unfavourable sign and

Bisin 12 not aspected by malefics, the person
suffers from loss of memory.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 162] =====
148 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

50, If the lord of 5 isa male, a male planet occupies it,
or a male planet aspects its lord and the Navamsa
of 5is amasculine one the eldest born will be
male. If 5 is feminine, the lord isa female and
these aspected by feminine planets the eldest born
will be female. IfB and M predominate and
influence the child, it becomes a eunuch.

SIXTH HOUSE.

51. If the lord of 6 occupies 1 with evil planets or 8, or if
these occupy 10 not seen by benefics the person
will have several sores. Ifthe lord of I, K, and
B occupy 4 or 12 or aspect 6 together, there will be
disease in the lower part of the addomen. If the lord
of 6 with K occupies birth, the person has lepro-
sy or bilionsness, if he is with M diseases arising
from coldness or numbness, if he is with R the
person will be passing blood, or suffer from disea-
ses from corruption of blood,

52. If the lord of 1 is with the lord of 6 and R, he will
have constant fevers, if with C danger by drow-
ning, if with K danger in battle, fights, or small-pox
if with B mental disease, or brain fever, if with
S danger from wife, if with M flatulence or many
complicated diseases, if with T there is danger from
cobra bites, scorpion stings; thieves, cheats and in-
explicabls diseases.

53, If the lord of 6 joius with B, and G occupies birth sign,
the sexual organs of the person will be covered
with ugly sores and the aspect of evil planets will
make them defective or pierced through.

54, If the lord of 7 with S occupies 6 the wife becomes

_ barren or will have her sexual organ diseased, if
the lord of 6 with the lord of 1 joins with M and

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 163] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 149

occupies quadrants or trienes the person will be
imprisoned or confined, if they join T or Kt and
occupy similar positions the person will be bound
by chains. If M occupies 9,G in 3,or R in 8 or 12 the
man will suffer from amputation of the arms. If C
occnpies 7, and K and G are in 8 the man will have
his feet cut off. If M occupies 1, T isin 7, Sis in
10 he will have his head cut off. If weak C is aspec-
ted by T,and M occupies 1, the person will have his
head smashed. ,

55. If C is in 6, 8, or 12 and has the aspect of the lord
of 1, or if Mis debilitated and occupies an un-
favourable Navamsa aspected by evil planets the
person will die by accident. If the lord of 6 and
8 or K joins with the lord of 2 and occupy bad
signs or Navamsas, or if R and K aspect each
other, or occupy their mutual Navamsas the per-
son dies in battle. If C is in 6 with K predict brain
disease, or jaundice, if C is in 6 with M and R pre-
dict death from serpents or pinas in stomach.

56. If K and B occupy 6 aspected by S and C and occupy
unfavourable Navameas there will be consumption.

57. If 6 is occupied by M and K aspected by Kaud T, and
the lord of the birth is weak, the person will be
constantly sick. If 6 is occupied by M and Gulika
aspected by R, K, and T without good aspect the
man will suffer from gout, asthma and pthisis. If
C isin a watery sign and the lord of that sign occu-
pies 6 the man suffers from incurable venereal dis-
ease and stone in the bladder. If C is in 6, M in 8,
evil planet in 12 and the lord of the birth in an
unfavourable Navamsa the person will suffer from
nasal disease.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 164] =====
150 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

58. If the lord of 6 occupies quadrantsfaspected by malefics
and they also occupy 6 or if the lord of 6 is in
birth and the lord of birth is in 6 with M and Gu-
lika, or if the lord of 6 is with evil planets or is
placed between them or is aspected by malefics the
person snffers much from enemies.

59. If the lord of 6 is in 8 or 12 and is debilitated or is
in a bad sign and the lord of 1 is well situated the
person will become foeless. If 6 or its lord is as-
pected by or joined with benefics the person gains
over his enemies and thereby benefits himself. If
the lord of 6 or the lord of birth is weak, and is
seen by benefics the person gains over his enemies.
If the lord of 1 occupies 6 or aspects him, the per-
son suffers much from his cousins. If Gand S
are in 1 with the lord of 6, aspected by M, K or T
the man suffers much from the intrigues of his
cousins. If the lord of 9 occupies 6 or is aspected
by its lord or the latter is with M or K the person
suffers from thieves, fire and vagabonds.

60. If 6 is with benefics or its lord is with them or has
their aspect, or if heis between two evil pla-
nets the person will be fond of pulses and pickles.

If S and Bare in 6, with or aspected by benefics
and occupy good Navamsas the person will be
fond of sweet things. 1f B joins S or is seen by
malefics he will be fond of sour or punjent things.

SEVENTH HOUSE.

61, (a) IfS isin 7 the person becomes passionate, if B
. fond of other family women, if G fond of his
own wife, if M fond of ugly women, if K fond

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 165] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 151

of many women, if R he will ill treat his"wife.

(b) 1f the lords of 2, 7, and 6 occupy birth, and S is
with malefics the person will have many wives.

(c) If evil planets occupy 1 and 6 the person] will
be licentious. If the lordsof1, 6,and 2 join
malefics or occupy 7, or M is with the lord of
7 or is aspected by evil planets the person be-
corres very immoral.

(d) If the lord of 7 is with T or Kt aspected by’
malefics or if the lords of 10, 2, and 7 occupy
10 the person becomes very adulterous. If
4is occupied by even one planet, or if the
lord of 5 isaspected by the lords of 7 or 6
the person becomes fond of other women.

62. Ifweak C is in 7 with malefics, or if evil planets
occupy 1 withthe lord of 7the person becomes
fond of others wives.

68. If the lord ot 5 is in-7 and the lord of 7 is with male-
fics, and S is weak the wife dies during pregnancy.
If the lord of 2as well asthe lord of 7 occupy
their own houses the person will have only one
wife. Ifthe lord of 7 is powerful, exalted or re-
trograde and occupies 1, the person will have many
wives. If the lord of 1 is in 12, evil planets
occupy 7 and the lord of 2 is in conjunction with
malefics the person has two wives. If the lord of
7 is with good planets and is unfavourably situated,
and evil planets are in 7 the person will have two
marriages.

64. If many evil planets occupy 2, or 7 is similarly occu-
pied, or its lord is aspected by them theperson will
marry thrice. Ifthe lord of birth occupies 10
with strong B, and the lord of 7 with C in 3, the

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 166] =====
152 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

person becomes a hunter after women. If the
lords of 12 and 2 occupy 3 aspected by © or the
lord of 9 the person will be surrounded by women.
Ifthe lord of 7 occupies quadrants or trienes, or
occupies good houses or Navamsas, or joins with
the lord of 10 the man will have numberless women.

65. If the lords of 7 and 11 join together or aspect each
other or powerfully occupy trienes he will have
many women. If the lord of 9 isjin 7 and its lord
is in 4 or the lords of 7 and 11 occupy quadrants
the pereon will marry many wives.

66. If the lord ofthe sign occupied by the Navamsa joined
by the lord of 7 is with Bor good planets, and
occupies Paravatamsa or is otherwise powerful the
person will marry a hundred wives. Take the
lord of the Navamsa occupied by S and then find
out the lord of the sign occupied by him and if
the latter occupies quadrants or Gopuramsa the
person marries 300 wives.

67. If an evil planet is with the lord of 7 and another oc-
cupies 7, and the lord of the Navamsa occupied by
the lord of 7 happens to be an evil planet, the per-
son gets a miserable wife. Ifthe lordof 7 occu-
pies a bad place and S is weak the person has a
bad wife. If the lord of 7 is debilitated as also S,
and not aspected by benefics the person will have
a wretched wife.

68. (a) Ifagood planet is with the lord of 7 and another
occupies it, and both are aspected by benefics
the person has a desirable wife. If the lord of
7, S and the lord of 10 occupy good Navamsas,
or otherwise powerful, orifS is exalted or occu-
pies a good Navamsa or if the lord of 7 is with

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 167] =====
(20)

69.

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 153
G or is seen by him or joins good Navamsas
as also §S, or if the lord of 7 is aspected by R
with S, and G occupies 7 the person will have
an excellent, loving and chaste wife. If R and
the lord of 7 are powerful, in conjunction with
benefica or occupy good Navamsas the spouse

will be faithful.

C and the lord of 7 are in bad places, or as-
pected by or joined with malefics, or placed be-
tween them the wife becomes unfaithful and
will be given to acts of cruelty. If S and the
lord of 7 are in company with debilitated pla-
nets or in debilitated houses, and occupy
evil Navamsas the person will have cruel,
adulterous and murderous wife. If T or Kt
joins the lord of 7, not aspected by bonefics and
occupies unfavourable houses, the person will
have a wife who administers poison or adapts
other means to kill him, and she will be licen-
tious and will be careless of reputation.

(a) If the lord of 7 is close to the lord of 1, or if 1, 2

and 7 are occupied by good planets or their
lords join good Navamsas, or have the aspect
of benefics there will be early marriage. If
the lord of 7 is with an evil planet and occu-
pies trienes, S is with malefics and the lord of
2isin10 there willbe late marriage. If R
is in7 there will be intercourse with barren
women, if C is in 7 with maids and servile
classes, if K with women in their menses, if B
with mercantile, barren and poor women, if G
with priestly and religious women, if S with

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 168] =====
154 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

pregnant women, if M with old or unmatured
girls, Ifthe above planets occupy 4 he will
be guilty of the same offences and the places
of adultery are thus determined. For R the
place is garden, or forest, for C in houses, for
K near walls or delapidated buildings, for B
pleasure walks or places of resort, for G in
temples or holy places, for S in watery places,
for Mor T stables, sheds or other places
where animals are kept.

(8) If all quadrants are occupied by evil planets
without being aspected by or in company
with benefics the person will have intercourse
with animals. If al] the quadrants are aspec-
ted by maleficsthe person will have connec-
tion with beasts. If evil planets occupy qua-
drants or trienes orif M joins with Gulika the
person enjoys like a brute. If Ris with M
and K occupies 4, or if T occupies 7 and K is
in 4, the person enjoys sexual intercourse like
a brute.

(c) If M is seen by S or occupies A or So with S, or’
joins with the lord of 2 the person will be mad-
ly fond of sexual organs and will kiss or fondle
them, or will be guilty of solitary sin. If the
lord of 10 is seen by M or occupies A or So
aspected by or is in conjunction with S the
person will kiss the sexual organs or make
much of them. If the lord of 1 is debilitated
or similarly aspected he will be guilty of
similar acts.

70. If K occupies 7 the wife’s breast will be dried up, if

TorMisin7 she will have hanging or ugly breast,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 169] =====
c

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUOTOR. 15;

<

if R she will have erect and strong breast, if B, S
G or full C she will have well developed and attrac-
tive breast. If thelord of 7 is with benefics or with
watery planets or occupies watery signs aspected by
G the person will havea wife witha luxuriantly de-
veloped breast. If R or K is with M or Gulika, and the
lord of 7 occupies an evil division his wife will have
a long sexual organ. If the lord of 7 is with S or G
and occupies a good division her sexual organ will be
middle sized, and if evil planets join with him the or-
gan will be very long. If the lord of 7 is in a watery
sign, S also the same, if 7 is also a watery sign as-
pected by full C, or if C occupies 7 being a watery
sign aspected by S the sexual organ of the wife
will be soft and secreting. If full C isin 7 or a watery
Navamsa aspected by G, the sexual organ will be
soft and tender. IfS is exalted or occupies a wa-
tery Navamsa and joins with R the wife will have
little inclination for sexual intercourse. If 7 is
owned by an evil planet, its lord is between two male-
fics, or joins or is aspected by them, the sexual organ
~ will be hard, and the women requires good strong in-
tercourse. Ifthe lord of 7 is weak, occupies a bad
house or joins with powerless planets the wife will have
her organ dry and she requires good sexual operation.

EIGTH HOUSE.

71, If good planets occupy 1 and K is in 10, there wilt
be danger to maternal uncles. If M joins 10 cousins
die, and if C is in 10 with evil planets their mother
will die. If R and C occupy 1, and evil planets join 12
not aspected by benofics, the person dies very soon.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 170] =====
156 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

77.

79.

80.

81.

. If C isin 1, R in 7 and joins with malefics the child

dies soon

. If C and R occupy 12 and M is not aspected by bene-

fics the child dies soon.

. If C and R occupy 12 and the lord of 12 is in 1, the

child will have very short life,

. If the lord of 1 is powerful and joins with the lord of

4, and the lord of 9 joins 12 aspected by malefics
the person loses his parents in early life.

. If the lord of 3 with C occupies 3, 6, or 12 the child

will be suckled by another woman. If the lord of
9 and R occupy 3, 6,or 12 the person loses his
father soon. If the lord of 9 is with R and M, and
occupies 9 the father dies during night time, or if
the same joins with the lord of 6 the death of the
father takes place during night time.

If there are many malefics in 8, the private parts will
be diseased, if good planets aspect them there
will be much relief.

. If the lord of 8 is with malefics or is aspected by

them, or is between them, or occupies bad houses,
or isin 8 the person will be disgraced.

If 8 becomes a movable sign, its lord is also in a mov-
able sign, death takes place in a foreign country, if
8 and its lord are in a fixed sign and M is similarly
placed, the person dies in his own home, and if
the above three are in common signs the person
dies while travelling.
Tf the lord of 9 is in 8, or is in a movable sign the child
will be born when its father is not in the place.

NINTH HOUSE.

If C is in 9 with malefics or S, or if its lord is with

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 171] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 187 `

them, the person will have criminal connection
with his teacher’s wives. Ifthe lord of the Na-
vamsa occupied by the lord of 9 is with evil planets,
or if C occupies 9 with malefics the person commits
adultery with elderly matrons. lf C is weak or
occupies an evil Navamsa, or S issimilarly situated,
or if the lord of 9 is debilitated or occupies a bad
Navamsa with S, the person has connection with
motherly relations. If G or S is exalted or occupies
favourable divisions, and the lord of 1 is powerful
the person becomes charitable,honest and straight-
forward. ‘

82. If the lord of 9 occupies the Navamsas of G, or B
aspected by benefics, or is placed between them,
the person becomes a man of principles. If good
planets occupy 9 and its lord occupies a weak Na-
vamsa or unfavourable division the person does
charity with a view to become famous.

83. If T and M are in 9 and its lord is aspected by Guli-
kain the Navamsa, the person becomes cruel-
hearted and impious. If the lord of 9 is a good
planet, and R is in conjunction with a good planet
the person will have paternal bliss.

84, If the lords of I and 9 are powerful as wellas R, and
aspected by benefics, the person will be obedient
to his father. Ifthe lord of 9 isin quadrants or
trienes aspected by or is in conjunction with good
planets the person becomes wealthy. If the lord
of 2 is in 9, and the lord of 9 is in 11, and the lord
of 11 is in 2 aspected by or in conjunction with
the lord of 10 the person becomes extremely weal-
thy. If the lord of 9 joins the lord of 3 aspected
by or is conjunction with benefics, and occupies

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 172] =====
158 ASTROLOGICAL 88LF INSTRUCTOR.

good Navamsas the person gets much wealth from
his brothers.

85. Hf the lord of 9 is in 12 aspected by powerless or
debilitated planets and occupies bad divisions or if
the lord of 9 is weak, malefics are in 9 and the
lord of 1 is bad, the person becomes poor.

86. If the lord of 1 occupies 9 and the lord of 9 joins 1,
or if the lord of 9 occupies 11, or if the lords of
11 and 9 join together and are in 2, the man gets
rich again. Here it is meant that the man gets
money, loses it and gets it back again. If the lord
of 10 is in 9 and the lord of 9 is powerful; and is
aspected by S or G the person becomes very:
religious.

87. If the lord of 9 is exalted, and is aspected by good
planets, and benefics are in 9, or if the lord of 1 is
seen by the lord of 9, and they occupy quadrants
or trienes, the person becomes very charitable.

88. If the lord of 9 is in 4, and the lord of 10 occupies,
quadrants, and the lord of 12 has the aspect of G the

. man will bé charitable.

89. If the lord of 5 joins 9 and the lord of 9 occapies 10
aspected by the lord of 1 the person receives libe-

. ral gifts or charities.

90. If the lord of 9 is seen by the lord of 10, and occupies
quadrants or trienes the person receives very sub-
stantial charitable gifts.

TENTH HOUSE.

91. If the lords of 10, 2 and B are powerful he will per-
form sacrifices. IfS, B and G occupy 8, 6 and 12
the person becomes irreligious. If T or M is in 10
he bathes in holy rivers. If Bis in 12 or the lord

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 173] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 159

of 12 is exalted, or if C occupies 3 being a watery
sign, aspected by benefics the person will bathe in
sacred rivers. If G joins B or K the person will
build temples, mantapams and choultries.

92. If the lord of 10 is in it, the person repairs’ old build-
ings, temples, churches, or if the lord of 10 occu-

. pies Gopuramsa he repairs tanks and wells.

98. If B is in 10 and its lord is in 9 without malefics, the
person performs many sacrifices

94, [€the lord of 10 is B and aspected by benefics or is
is in good Navamsas the person commands good
respect, If R is in 10 with K, and ifthe lord of
10 occupies any one of the quadrants, the person
will be cruel and greatly feared. If the lord of
10 is with M as also thelord of 8, and join cruel
Navamsas or quadrants, the person will give crael
and unreasonable commands and he will be great-
ly feared.

95. If R and M are in 10, or the lord of 10 is between
evil planets the man becomes -very- unpopular. I£
10 is occupied by good planets or its lord js well
situated and aspected by benefics the person will
be popular, persevering, and steady in carrying

. out his works.

96. If 10 is with G or other benefics and its lord is with
good planets, the person will be obliging and have
good business tact,

97. If malefics occupy 10 and its lord is similarly
joined by them the person becomes careless of his
reputation.

98. Lf the lord of 6 is in 10, and the lord of 10is with M,
and occupy quadrants or trienes the person com-
mands many servants of both sexes.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 174] =====
160 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

99. If the lord of 10 or the house itself is seen by benefics
in company with M, the person will command many
servants.

100. If malefics occupy 10 without being aspected by or
in conjunction with good planets, the person will
have weak knees.

ELEVENTH HOUSE.

101. If the lord of 11 occupies quadrants or trienes or 11 is
with malefics or if the lord of 2 occupies 11, and the
Jord of 11 occupies 2 or these two occupy quadrants
the person will be very wealthy.

102. If 11 or its lord is placed between two good planets
or occupies good divisions,or if the lord of the house
occupied by the lord of 11 is seen by benefics or
placed between them the person will be rich.

108. If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by 11 is power-
ful and is aspected by the lord of 2 he will be very
rich.

104. If the lord of the Thrimsamsa occupied by the lord
of 11 becomes powerful by being in company with
benefics, and aspected by the lord of 10, the person
becomes wealthy.

105. If the above lords are in conjunction with malefics
the man loses money

106. The direction in which a pergon gets wealth will be
determined by the sign occupied by the lord of 11
or that indicated by the house itself,

107. If the lord of 11 is a good planet aspected by bene-
fics, the person will have good ears.

108, If the above planets are not powerful and have bad

` asociations the person will have bad ears, and if

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 175] =====
(21) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 161

the planets are debilitated or in combust the per-
son becomes deaf.

109. If 11 is occupied by benefics, and itslord is well sit-
uated, the person will have elder brothers and they
will be successful, and their sexes must be deter-
mined by the planets and the signs they occupy.

110. Ifthe planets are powerful and occupy good divisions
the person will have powerful friends, but if they
are weak the person will have cheating and false
companions.

TWELFTH HOUSE.

111. If 12 is with malefics, as well as its lord, and both
have evil aspect, or if 12 or its lord is with M and
Gulika, and occupies bad places the person will
waste his money on immoral and illegal purposes.
If the lord of 12 is aspected by the lord of 7 and
these two are powerless, his money will be wasted
through his wife’s influence.

112. If the lord of 12 isin trienes, evil planets aspect
quadrants, and if they occupy bad divisions, or if
the lord of 12 is aspected by benefics, or the lord of
10, and occupies good Navamsas, the person spenda
his money on charitable purposes.

118, If the lord of \.. isweak and is seen, by the lord of
6 ia conjunction with malefies or Gulika, monep will
be spent on account of enemies. If the lord of 5
8 weak or joins evit planets, and aspects the lord,
of 12, the person loses money through children

114, If evil planets occupy 12 or its lord is aspected by
ot is ih comprny with weak planets, tho person.
suffers from bodily weakness or defect

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 176] =====
162 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

115. If T and Gulika occupy 12, and are aspected by the
lord of 6, or if the lord of 12 occupies bad divisions
or joins with evil planets wichout good planets, the
person will go to hell. If exalted planets occupy
12, and are aspected by good planets, and occupy
Davalokamsa or such good divisions, the person
goes to heaven.

116. If benefics occupy 12 or its lord joins with them, the
person will be fond of good furniture. If the lord
of 12 is exalted, joins good divisions and is aspec-
ted by benefics the person will have nice cots and
agreeable curtains.

117. 1£ the lord of 12 is exalted and is aspected by
the lord of 9, the person will have gilt or highly
ornamenta] furniture. IfS occupies 5 with C or
these together aspect 5, the person will be fond of
worshipping goddesses.

118. If male planets join or aspect 5, the person will wor-
ship gods.

119. If M isin 5 or sees that sign, the person will be fond
of holding communication with devils, spirits and
hobgoblins,

120. If C occupies or aspects 5, the person will be clever
in magic or such tricks which pass off for magic.

CHAPTER VIII.
MISCELLANEOUS COMBINATIONS.

The fellowing combinations are briefly sketched here,
so that the reader might see that even when the previously
stated combinations are not present, the person may still
be in a good or bad condition, and he has to account for
it by examining whether any one of the undermentioned

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 177] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 163

combinations are found in the horoscope. These are per-

manent combinations and they affect the party more or

less with their main influences all through his life, subject
of course to such special modifications as are brought
about by the planetary periods or Dasas.

1. (a) Rajju—all the planets occupy movable signs, it is
called Rajju, and the person will be jealous of
others success, living in foreign territory, fond
of travelling, and capable of enduring much
fatigue.

(b) Musala—all the planets in fixed signs—fond of
good name, conceited, wealthy, and capable
of undertaking and managing several works
single handed.

(c) Nala—all the planets in common signs—defective
organs, persevering, wealthy and very skilful
‘in all the arts,

2. (a) If Coccupies quadrants from R, the person will
be unpolite, peor, ignorant, unskilful, and
miserable.

(b) If C occupies Panaparas from R, the person will
be moderately intelligent, well to do, and or-
dinary in his occupation.

(c) If C occupies Aupdklimas from R, the person will
be very polite, extremely wealthy, highly in-
telligent, well educated, and very skilful in
the arts and sciences, .

8. Audhiyogam—G, Sand B in6,7 and 8 from C, here
all the planets might occupy any one of these
houses, or two together in one house, or three, one
in each house—he will be a king, minister or com-
mander-in-chief according to their power—great
wealth, happiness, universal conquest, loss to ene-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 178] =====
164. ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

mies, long life and excellent health. If evil pla
nets occupy the above houses, the person will
become a tyrant but still will enjoy the same ad-
vantage,

4, (a) Sunapha—planets (excepting R) occupying the
second house from C—the person becomes a
king or his equal, wealthy, self exerting, well
educated, intelligent, and will have good re-
putation.

(b) Anapah—planets in the 12th house from C savivg
R—good health, polite manners, tact, fame,
equanimity of mind, enjoyment of all sensual
pleasures, fine taste, good jewels, furniture,
sweet scents, nature that brooks no opposition.

(c) Dhurdura—planets in 2 and 12 from C except-
ing R—enjoys all kinds of worldly enjoyments,
excellent conveyances, immense wealth, good
and generous disposition, obedient servants,

(b) Kemadrama—C having no planets in 2 or 12
from her, that is when there are no planets
either in front or back of C—dirty, indolent,
carless of character, bodily and mental disease,
fond of mean and undignifying acts, poor, cruel,
a hanger on others, devoid of feelings of self
respect. The person will have these even
when he is born in @ royal family, much more
so of course, when this combination in present
in other horoscopes. IfCis with any planet,
or any one of the planets occupies quadrants
from C the evil results above sketched will be
considerably mitigated, but occasionally the
person will feel them.

In these cases the presence or absence of R will mako

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 179] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 165

no difference. These combinations are caused by K, B,
G, S and M, and their effects are different. Thus if K
causes any one of these yogas he will produce great ela-
tion of spirits, courage, wealth and romantic nature. If
B, the person becomes clever, eloquent and highly versed
in allthe arts and Sciences. If G, he will be wealthy,
charitable, happy and highly respected by the rulling au-
thorities. If 8, he will be licentious and enjoys different
sensual pleasures. If M, he will enjoy comforts at others
cost, popular, leader of castemen.

5. Vasumathiyoga—lIf, 3, 6,10 and 11 from birth or C are
occupied by S, G and B—the person will become a
millionaire, or a very wealthy man, or a man in
exalted position, according to the strength of the
planets named above.

6. If benefics occupy quadrants or trienes and malefics
are in 3, 6 and 11 he becomes a great statesman.

7. If G and B join together, or aspect each other, the per-
son will have immense political power.

-8. If the lord of the house, where a planet chances to be is
debilitated, or the planet which willhave its exalta-
tion there, occupies any one of the quadrants, the
person rises from poverty to eminence.

9. If C occupies any one of the quadrants, and is aspected
by powerful Gor S the person becomes a great
magistrate.

10. If debilitated planets occupy their Navamsas, or if the
exalted planets occupy their debilitated Navamsas
the person becomes an eminent citizen.

11. If the 12 zodiacal signsare equally divided, into 3 parts
we get 4 signs for each division. Divide the life of
the party into 3 equal parts. If the first four houses
from birth contaix the largest number of benefics,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 180] =====
166 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

the person enjoys the best fortune in the first period
of his life, if the second division contains the
largest number of benefics then he will have best for-
tune in thesecond part of his life, if the last division
contains the largest number of benefics then he
will have the best fortune in the third part of his
life. If they are equally distributed then he will
have continuous fortune. This will enable us, of
course with reference to planetary periods, powers
and aspects to predict miseries, dismissals, prosecu-
tions, losses of wealth and misery or happiness.

12. 1f G isin 1, Bisin quadrants, aspected by the lords
of I or9 he attains to great position.

18. If Gisin 5, 7, or9 aspected by the lord of birth, the
person attains to great political rank.

14, If Mis in quadrants, trienes or Moolathrikonam or is
exalted, aspected by the lord of 10 the person be-
comes 2 statesman.

15. If the lord of 10 isin 8, or is exalted or in friendly
Navamsa, and occupies Paravatamsa, he becomes a
great officer.

16. IfG isin 5, and C isin one of the quadrants from 6,
and the lord of the house occupied by C is in a
fixed sign, the person will become an eminent
statesman.

17. Ifthe lord of the Navamsa occupied by C is in quad-
rants, or trienes, or occupies any of the quadrants
from B, the man becomes a great lord.

18. If C with K isin 2 or 3, and T is in 5, the person be-
comes a great lord.

19, Ifthe lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of 9
joins 5 or 4, the person becomes a great statesman.

20, IfM and T occupy 10 aspected by the lord of 9, and

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 181] =====
21.

22,

23.

24.

25,

26.

27.

28,

29.

` 30.

31.

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 167

the lord of the birth is with an evil planet he be-
comes an eminent officer.

If M is in birth without favourable aspect and other
planets are debilitated or occupy bad divisions, he
becomes a begger and will be the cause of the ruia
of his family.

If the lord of the birth occupies 12, evil planets are
in 10, and C is with K, the person goes a begging
with a loathsome body, and will suffer all the pangs
of misery.

If T is in 1, C, B and S occupy quadrants, the person
becomes an outcaste, and renouuces his religion.

If M is in quadrants, Cin 1 and G in 12, the person
gets worthless children and wife, and becomes a
miserable wretch.

I£S is debilitated and is inthe Navamsa of M, R and C
occupying 12, and M aspects 7 the person depends
upon others for livelihood, and will lead a worth-
less life.

If malefics are in 4and 5, and C is in 12 or 8 the man
becomes blind.

If C ocenpies 10, B in 7, and Min 2 he will have de-
fective organs or loses some of them by disease.

If weak C is in 4 aspected by malefics alone, the per-
son will have falls from his coaches or horses.

If C and R occupy 9 without good aspect the person’s
father will be drowned.

If R and C are in P aspected by malefics, the man’s
father will be drowned.

If G is debilitated as well as R, with evil planets in
quadrants the person will be guilty of infanticide.

. If malefics occupy quadrants and S isin 8, the person

will be a great hunter.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 182] =====
168 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

88.

34.
. If Ris in 5, 8, or 9 the person will have his body

36.

37.

88.

89.

40.

41.

42.

46.

If C and B are in 10, aspected by or in conjunction
with malefics, and join inauspicious Navamsas and
divisions the person will go on killing birds daily.

If C is in 12 or 7, with S, the person loses his left eye.

pierced through.

Gada.—all planets occupying the two nearest quar-
ants asin 1 and 4, or 4and 7, or 7 and 10, or 10
and 1—fond of religious rites, wealthy, clever in
earning money.

Sakata.—all planets in land 7—living by carriage
manufactories or hiring coaches, sickly, bad and
-quarrelsome.

Vihaga.—all planets in 4 and 10—messenger, vagrant
fond of picking quarrels with people.

Hala.—all the planets in trienes to each other with
none in birth sign—the person lives entirely by
cultivation.

Srungataka.—all the planets in 1, 5 and 9—the per-
son lives happily in old age.

Yoopa.—all the planets in 1, 2, 3 and 4—charitable,
sincere and fond of sacrificial rites.

Ishu.—all the planets in 4, 5, 6 and 7—executioner,
master of a prison orjail,maker of arrows and bows.

. Sakthi—all the planets in 7, 8, 9and 10—disgrace-

ful conduct, lazy, unhappy, poor, miserable.

. Danda.—all planets in 10, 11, 12 and 1—neglected

by those that are near and dear to him, following
the most hateful profession.

. Now.—all planets in 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6 and 7 in a line—

famous, liable to frequent misfortunes, miserly.
Koota.—all planets in 4, 5,6, 7,8,9 and 10 in a

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 183] =====
2) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 169

line—a terrible liar, miserly, official in charge of
jail birds.

47. Chatra.—all planets iu 7, 8, 9,10, 11 12 and 1 in
a line—he will help his friends and relations,
enjoyment in old life.

48. Dhanas.—all planets in 10, 11, 12, 1, 2,3 and 4 ina
line—a warior, enjoyment in young and old ages.

49. Ardachundra.—all planets in 7 houses in a regular
line wherever they might commence from—popu-
lar, handsome, a great minister or secretary to a
government.

50. Vallaki.—all planets in 7 houses in any manner or
order—keen-sighted, fond of dancing and singing.

51. Damiui—all planets in 6 houses—liberal, fond of help-
ing others, many cattle.

52, Pasa.—all planets in 5 houses—will be honest and
jast in the acquisition of wealth, possesses faithful
servants and devoted friends.

58. Kedara—all planets in 4 houses—successful culti-
vator, fond of helping his fellow creatures.

54, Shula,—all planets in 3 houses—a warrior, receives
many sword cuts, avaricious, fond of murdering or
butchering,revelling in the spilling of human blood.

55. Yuga.—all planets in 2 houses—poor, athiestic, mise-
rable.

56. Golaka.—all planets in one house—poor, filthy, igno-
rant, lazy, gotng against the world, servant in
carrying communications from place to place.

I have stated at considerable length some cf the mis-
cellaneous combinations, and the readers, I am sure, will
find them interesting and instructive. In making predic-
tions we have to bear in mind the fact, that, while a man
has, what we call, general happiness, he will be subjected

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 184] =====
170 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

to petty local or domestic afflictions. No one can be said
to be perfect in the enjoyment of worldly bliss. The
rich man has his own cares, while the poor man often
enjoys happiness, and the ingredients which go to make
us happy or miserable depend upon various considerations
and circumstances. When some combinations are pre-
dicting good, there are others that act against them,
and the duty of the astrologer or the student will be to
see which influences are strang’ and effective, and which
are not so. Without a careful study of the earlier part
of this book, the sabsequent portions will not be intelli-
gible, and the readers therefore are strongly recommen-
ded to master the details in the first and 2nd chapters,
so that they may find no difficulty in understanding the
rest. I can safely say that a gentleman of ordinary abi-
lities can master the details in less than a month, and a
familiarity with the preliminaries of a science book be-
comes indispensable for a thorough mastery of the sub-
sequent portions. All these combinations are subject to
the influences of the planetary periods or Dasas, as the
general law is subject to the local law, and the position
therefore of the planet whose Dasa commences, becomes
very important and affects the general results to a con-
‘siderable extent.

CHAPTER IX.
LUNAR EFFECTS.

I shall first give the effects of the 27 constellations
at the time of birth, and then the influences of the Moon.
1, Aswini.—polite, sweet speech, fond of jewels, good

dress, handsome, popular, intelligent, expert in
arts and sciences.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 185] =====
ABTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. -171

2 Bharani.—truthful, persevering, healthy, skillful, freo

from cares, happy.

3. Krittika.—voracious eater, fond of others wives, hand-

some, famous.

4. Rohini.—truthful, man of principles, polite, steady,
handsome.

. Mrugasira.—capricious, skillful, cowardly, talkative,
light-hearted, rich, fond of enjoyment.

6. Auridra.—dissimulator, proud, ungrateful, cruel-hear-
ted, sinful and fond of killing.

. Punarvasu.—fond of doing penance, happy, good
tempered, little cracked, sickly, thirsty, contented
with small gains.

8. Pushiami.—very quiet, popular, learned, wealthy and

fond of good deeds.

9, Auslasha.—pretender, cheating partners, sinful, un-

grateful and clever in swindling others. :

10. Makha.—enjoyment in life, many servants, great

wealth, religious, respectful, highly contented.

11. Poobba.—good speech, liberal, handsome, traveller,

submissive.

12. Uttara.—popular, learned, enjoyable life, free from

cares.

13, Hasta.—hopeful, steady, given to strong liquors, un-

kind, pilferer.

14, Chitta—charming eyes,fond of various colored clothes.

15. Swathi.—polite, moral, merchant, kind-hearted,

sweet words, fond of doing meritorious deeds.

16. Visakha.—narrow minded, jealous, miser, good look-

ing, clever in the art of speech, fond of picking
"quarrels.

17. Avooradha,—wealthy, residence in a foreign country,

not capable of enduring hunger, roving habits.

ow

sa

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 186] =====
172 ` ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

18. Jaista.—jolly, few friends, charitable, unreasonably
angry.

19. Moola.—conceited, wealthy, happy, kind-hearted,
resolute, enjoyment in life

20. Poorvashadha.—good and agreeable wife, conceited,
constant in friendship.

21,,Uttarashadha.—polite, charitable, grateful, popular,
many friends.

22. Sravana.—rich, learned, good and chaste wife, enjoy-
able life, famous.

28. Dhanista.—wealthy, liberal, courageous, fond of mu-
sic, avaricious.

24, Sattabhisha.—eloquent and distinct speaker, gamb-
ler, fond of bad women, murderer of enemies,
adventurous, deep-hearted.

25. Poorvabhadra.—sorrowful, submissive to women,
wealthy, clever, miserly.

26. Uttarabhadra.—eloquent speaker, happy, blessed with
children and grand children, unrivalled, chari-
table.

27. Raivathi—well developed body, popular, warrior,
man of strict moral principles, wealthy.

‘When the constellations are strong these effects must
be foretold. I shull now give the effects of the Moon.

1, C in A.—round reddish handsome eyes, fond of vege-
tables and hot things, poor eater, irritable but soon
pacified, fond of constant travelling, licentious,
week knees, unsteady wealth, fond of war, caressed
by females, clever in serving others, bad nails,
head with a scar or sore mark, conceited, eldest
of the brothers, good marks in the palm, capricious,
timid in approaching watery surfaces.

2. C in Ts.—handsome, majestic gait, big thighs, full face,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 187] =====
3,

७

ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 173

marks in the face, back or side, liberal, enduring
sorrow, brooking no opposition in command, a little
hump-backed, begetting daughters, phlegmatic,
forsaken by previous friends and relations, rich,
patient, forgiving, happy in middle and old ages.

C in Gi—fond of women, skilful in the art of sexual

intercourse, reddish eyes, learned, expert in carry-
ing embassies, ringlets, sharp, witty, clever in
judging others thoughts, good gambler, handsome
features, sweet speech, voracious eater, possessing
musical faculty, fond of dancing, imperial nose,
given to unnatural offences.

C in Cr.—fast but unsteady walker, high buttocks,

easily eonquered by the fair sex, good friends,
astrologer, master of many houses, unsteady for-
tune, stout neck, short, easily deceived by kind
words, obliging, fond of swimming and gardens.

C in Lo,—irritable, swollen cheeks, bloated face, yel.

lowish eyes, few issues, hated by women, fond of
flesh, forests and mountains, cholic pains, bad -
teeth or pains there, suffering from hunger and
thirst, mental worry, liberal, courageous, steady,
proud, respectful mother.

. Cin V.—modest, dull but charming eyes, majestic

walk, long broad shoulders and arms, happy, tender
skinned, truthful, clever in fine arts, charitable,
learned, comrehensve intellect, fond of sexual con-
nection, getting others property, good speech,
journeys in foreign countries, many daughters but
few sons. ,

. C in L.—Pious,regard for eliderly or religious men, in-

telligent, man of strict moral principles, submis-

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 188] =====
174 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. |

sive to women, tall, high nose, lean and shaky
body, fond of walking, wealthy, defective organs,
skilled in mercantile bargains, getting pet names,
sickly, helper of relations and castemen but reject-
ed by them.

8. C in So.—broad chest and eyes, fleshy buttocks, thighs
and knees, reglected by parents and masters, sick-
ly in early life, political respect, yellowish eyes,
cruel-hearted, good marks in palms secret sins.

9. C in Ss.—long face, neck and teeth, good patrimony,
liberal, poet, strong, clever in speaking, thick
nether lip, big ears and nose, hardworking, fond of
drawing, bad nails, short but broad shoulders,
accomplished, well read in religion, hater of rela-
tions, not won by force bat open to persuation.

10. C in Cs.—fond of family, good eyes, collecting money
under false pretences of charity, waist weak or
not developed, lean buttocks, sharp in understand-
ing things. enjoyable life, lazy, incapable of endar-
ing cold, strong, traveller, miserly, author, fond of
low women or hags, destitute of feelings of shame,
unkind.

11. C in As.—long and uncouth neck like that of a camel,
stiff, body with bristle like hairs, swollen viens, long
feet, thighs, back and buttocks, broad mouth, stout
waist, deaf, fond of others wives, unsteady fortune,
doing evil deeds, devoted to friends, fond of flowers
scents, sandal and fine things, capable of enduring
fatigue.

12. C in P.—enjoying others wealth, gains from pearls
and gems, fond of wife and good clothes, hand-
some well formed and attractive bedy,imperial nose,
large head, despiser of enemies,easy conquest over

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 189] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 175

them, submissive to women, charming eyes, finder
of hidden treasures, learned, good reputation,
happy life.

Here we have to take three points into consideration,
the strength of C, the power of the lord of the house
where C is placed, and the strength of the sign itself. If
all these are strong, the person will surely have all the
characteristics, but when they are not so their traces will
be found, if they are partly strong, some of the qualities
will be found prominent.

CHAPTER X. -
Planetary influences in the signs.

1. R in A.—famous, learned, traveller, earning livelihood
by carrying arms and using them, not wealthy, if
Ris within 10 degrees of A he will be wealthy,
commander of many troops, famous.

2. Rin Ts.—clever cloth merchant, dealer in miscellane-
ous articles and scents, hater of “women, fond of
music.

3. R in Gi.—grammarian, astronomer, wealthy and pclite.

4. Bin Cr.—cruel, poor, doing others but neglecting his
own work, constant fatigue by travelling, sorrow-
fal.

5. R in Lo.—fond of living in forests, hills, mountains,
and grazing grounds, stubborn, strong, huntsman.

6. Rin V.—good writer, drawer, painter, poet and ma-
thematician, cléver in religious lore, effiminate
body.

7. BR in L.—Mannfacturer of liquors, druvkard, traveller,
worker in gold ornaments, base.

8. R in So.—adventurons, cruel, reckless, earning money
by poisoning and drugging, losses of property in

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 190] =====
176 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

thefts, clever in the use of weapons, executioner or
following some killing profession.

9. Rin Ss—respected by well informed and pious men,
wealthy, short tempered, professor in medicine,
carpenter,

10. R in Cs.—mean-minded, stubborn, dealing in prohibi-
ted wares, not rich, miserly, enjoying at others cost.

11, Rion As.—ungentlemunly, poor, rejected by children
and family.

12. R in P.—pearl merchant or gains from them, courted
by women.

1. K in A and So.—kingly respect, traveller, commander
of troops, skilled in mercantile speculations, weal-
thy, possesses many marks wouads or cuts, suffers
from thieves, fond of womanly pleasures.

2. K in Ts and L.—submissive to women, dishonest with

friends and relatives, fond of others wives, friend-
ship with quacks, cheats, pedants, and timid men,
friendless,

3. K in Giand V.—unrivalled, many issues, friendless,
grateful, fond of war and music, miserly, undaunt-
ed, mendicant

4. K in Cr.—wealthy, gains from sailing on the sea and
trading in ships and boats, intelligent, defective
in bodily organs, cruel-hearted.

5. K in Lo.—poor, enduring fatigue and misery, wander-
ing in the midst of forests, few issues.

6. K in Ss and P.—many enemies, minister to a king or
chief, famous, fearless, few children.

7. Kin As.—Always melancholy, poor, wanderer, liar,
cruel.

8. K in Cs.—very wealthy ,many children, king or chief,
popular, friendly great personal respect,intelligent,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 191] =====
(23) ASTHOLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 177
1,

2.

>!

Bin A and So.—gambler, swindler, drunkard, liar,
double-hearted, athiestic, bad wife, robber.

Bin Ts and L.—preacher, many wives and children,
fond of acquiring wealth, liberal, obedient to pa-
rental and spiritual authorities.

. Bin Gi.—fond of gups, clever in grammer, logic, mu-

sic, dancing and drumming, sweet tongue, seeker
after pleasures.

. Bin Cr.—wealthy by speculations in or on water,

hater of his own men and relations.

. B in Lo.—rejected by the fair sex, destitute of children

family and wealth, stubborn, traveller.

Bin V.—liberal, educated, courageous, intelligent,
agreeable, happy, patient, possessed of considerable
tact and canning, undaunted.

. Bin Cs and As.—poor, hanger on, clever in mechani-

cal arts, given to borrowing, doing unnecessary and
unpaying work.

. Bin Ss.—respected by kings, learned, politic.
. Bin P.—servile and pleasing, fond of manufacturing

shoes, boots, leather bags and other mean articles.

. Gin A and So.—commander of troops, many wives,

children, much wealth, good and loyal servants,
forgiving disposition, handsome, good and loving
wife, famous. :

. @ in Ts and L.—sound, healthy, happy, blessed with

children, friends and wealth, liberal, popular.

. Gin Gi and V.—devoted servants, friends, relations

and children, good councillor, often consulted by
kings and‘ bigmen, able to manage complicated
affairs with ease, happy.

. Gin Cr.—children, wealth, gems, wife, onjoyments of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 192] =====
178 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

_, all descriptions, intelligent, educated.

-d. @ in Lo.—important commander, good wife, children,
happiness, skillful, educated.

6. Gin Ss and P.—ruler of a province, minister or a
commander, wealthy.

7..@ in As.—wealthy, children, intelligent, educated. en-
joyment, respect among friends and countrymen,
gems, servants.

8. G in.Cs.—miserable, poor, fond of irreligious works,
hated by the sectarian members.

1. 8 ० 4 and So.—fond of others wives, spending large
sums for them and being frequently cheated by
them, inourring religious hatred.

2. 8 in Ts and L.—self acquired money, self reliant, com-
manding the respect of rulers, leader of castemen,
famous, bold.

3. 5 in G.—knack to please rulers, wealthy, fond of mu-
sic, intelligent.

4. 8 in V.—mean and unscrupulous,unfortunate in wives,
careless of reputation.

5. 8 in Cs and As.—popular, respected, submissive to

_ Women, connection with women of evil repute.

6. S in Cr.—two wives, begger, timid, very passionate,
melancholy.

7. 8 in Lo.—acquisition of wealth through bad. women,
good wife, few children.

8. S in Ss.—respected for his admirable qualities, wealthy,
intelligent. :

9. & in P.—wealthy, learned, respected, adviser of kings
and nobles, fortunate in all his undertakings.

1. M in A.—stubborn, traveller, dissembler, neglected by
friends.

2. M in So.—imprisonment, weil thrashed, cruel hearted,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 193] =====
ABTBOLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 179

fickle minded, base.

. Min Gi and V.--miserable, shameless, poor, issueless,
bad painter, leader of peons, leader of a band of
desperadoes, principal man of his family.

. M in Ts.—incestuous intercourse, many wives, mode-
rate wealth.

. Min L.—famous, leader of men in towns, influential
citizen, commander of armies, wealthy, respected
by all classes.

. M in Cr.—begger, soon losing teeth, motherless, issue-
less, stubborn.

- Min Lo.—ignorant and stubborn, issueless, unhappy,
fond of doing others work.

. Min Ss and P.—good death, happy in the end, ste-
ward in a king’s or lord’s house, good wife and
children, leader of a town, commander of an army,
wealthy. ,

. Min Cs and As.—fond of others wealth and wives,
short sighted, leader of society, influential citizen,
dirty habits, enjoyable life, generous, steady, for-
tunate, wealthy.

All these results will have to be foretold only when

the planets occupy favourable divisions and are strong if
they are weak or otherwise debilitated they only leave
tra ces of the above named characteristics.

CHAPTER XI.
Results of planctary aspects.

1, 1f birth sign is A, or C is thero—if aspected by K the
person will be a leader, by B learned, by G a great
statesman, by S good man, by M thief, by R poor.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 194] =====
180 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

2. If Ts is birth, or C is there—if aspected by K poor, by
B thief, by G@ greatly respected by people, by Sa
ruler, by M wealthy, by R # menial.

. If Giis birth, or C is there—if seen by K dealer in arms
of all kinds, by Bking, by & educated, by S ad-
venturous, by M weaver, by R pieless.

. If Cr is birth, or C is there—if seen by K fond of wag-
ing war, by C poet, by G professor, by S king, by
Mearning bread by the use of arms, by R bad
sight or sore eyes.

. If Lo is birth, or C is there—aspected by K king, by B
astronomer, by G wealthy, by Saruler, by Ma
barber, by R a chief.

6. lf V is birth, or C is there—aspscted by B a leader,

by G commander of an army, by S skillfal; by k,
M, or K one that lives by courting the favour of
adulterous women.

7. If Lis birth, or C is there—seen by B a king, by G
goldsmith, by 8 merchant, by M, K or R nnsuceess-
ful in doing his own work and often defeated by
the intrigues of his enemies.

. If So is birth, or C is there—seen by Bfather of twins,
by @ cringing, by S washerman, by R defective
organs, by M poor, by K a ruler.

9. If So is birth or © is there—seen by B-leader of his

men, by G king, by S protector of many people, by
R, M, or K stubborn or showy fellow.

10. Birth Cs, or C there—seen by B king of kings, by G
akink, by 8 educated, by M wealthy, by R poor,
by K eraler. :

11, Birth As, or C there—aspected by B a ruler, by G
statesman, by S fond of others wives, by M, R or
K mean and adulterous.

€

»

oe

oo

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 195] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. . 181

12. If P is birth, or C there—aspected by B witty and hu-
morous, by G a king, by S learned, by R, Mor K
fond of doing sinful acts.

When C occupies her hora, and is aspected by pla-
nets similarly. occupying Moon’s hora, tlie result will be
very good, when C is in Moon’s hora and. has the aspect
of planets occupying the Sun’s hora or rice-verea the re-
sults are bad and the man suffers. This applies to the
birth sign also. I shall here give their influences in the
Navamsas.

1, IfC is in the Navamea of A or So.—seen by R protector
of towns or ruler, by K destroyer of animal life, by
B clever in wrestling, by G a ruler, by S wealthy,
by M quarrelsome.

2. IfC isin the Navamsa of Ts, or [..—aspected by R
stubborn, by K wheremonger, by B a good poet,
by G holy poet, by S fond of pleasures, by M fond
of others wives.

3. If C is in the Navamsa of Gi or V.---seen by Ra wrest-
ler, by K a thief, by B a poet, by G a minister, by S
professor of music, by M a clever architect

4. If C isin the Navamsa of Cr.—seen by R slender built,
by K greedy, by Ba hermit, by G a minister, by
S living as a pimp or on the ggood will of women,
by. M fond of work.

5. If C is in the Navamsa of Lo.—aspected by R revenge-
ful, by K conrted by kings, by B finds hidden
treasures, by G strict cormmander, by 8 18861698,
by M cruel-hearted

6. If C is in the Navamsa of P or Ss.—seen by R strong
bodied, by Kg skillful general, by B witty and
homorous, by G minister, by S impotent, by M
charitable.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 196] =====
182 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

?. IfC is in the Navamsa of Cs or As.—-seen by R few

« issues, by K miserable though rich, by B conceited

by G religious, by 8 fond of cruel-hearted and bad
women, hy M revengeful.

CHAPTER XII.
Kffects of Exaltations.

I have given above the relative influences of the pla-
nets in their several combinations, but I shall bere intro-
duce the reader to a simple method which will enable him
to find the general condition of the horoscope he is con.
sulting.

1, If at the time of birth one planet at least occupies its
own house, the person will be an ordinary member
of his commanity, if two are in their houses he will
be an influential member, if 3 planets are in: their
houses he will be its leader, if 4 planets are so
placed he will be wealthy, if 5 planets are in their
houses he will be very happy, if 6 planets are so
placed he will live in a regal state, and if 7 planets
are in their houses, he will be a mighty monarch.

2. If one planet is is @ friendly house, the person will be:
a dependent, if two occupy such houses he will be
largely helped.. by friends, if three planets are so
placed he will be supported by cousins, if 4 pla-
nets are so by all kinsmen, if five planets are 80 he

‘ will lead his opuntrymen, if 6 planets are 80 he.

will be commander of a large army, if 7 are so he
will become a king.

8. If one planet is exalted and aspected by friendly planet
he becomes a chief or ruler, if an exalted planet
is joined by a friendly planet he will be wealthy
and respected, if one planet is debilitated or occupies

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 197] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSIIMUCTOR. 183

an unfriendly house he will be poor, if two are so
he will be unhappy, if 3 are so he will be miserable,
if 4 are sohe will be sickly, if 5 are so he will
suffer from imprisonment and bondage. if 6 are
so he becomes a murderer or executioner, if 7
planets are so placed he will be thoroughly im-
moral, entirely sinful ang irreligious.

4. I£ evil planets in odd signs occupy It’s hora, the person
will be happy, wealthy, courageous and famous, if
benefics in even signs are in Moon’s hora he will
be tender-hearted, popular, charming, happy, edu-
cated, well behaved and generous with sweet
speech.

$. If evil planets in even signs occupy R’s hora he will
enjoy the results in the former part of 4 to some
extent, if benefics occupy C’s hara in odd signs he
will enjoy the resalts given in the latter part of 4
to some extent. Otherwise he will be poor and
neglected.

6. If C is in the following Drakkanams viz 2 and 3 of Cr,
land 2 of So, and 3 of P—the person will be
very cruel. If C is inl and Sof A, 2 and
3 of Gi, 2 and 3 of Lo, 2 of V, and 3 of Ss he be-
comes a great murderer or one fond of killing
always. If Cis in 2 of A, 2 of Ts, 1 of Cr, 1 and
2 of Lo, 3 of So, and 1 of Ss, he will have incestu-
ous intercourse. If C is in 2 and 8 of Gi, 1 of Lo,2
of L, and 1 of As the man will be a wanderer
without purpose.

’, 1£the Navamsa of birth falls in A—a theif, in Ts one
that spends all his money for sensual enjoyments,
in Gi learned, in Cr rich, in Loaruler, in V im-
potent, in La warrior, in So a carrier of burdens,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 198] =====
184 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

in Ss s subordinate, in Cs sinfal, in As executioner,
in P courageous. In Vargottama Navamaas tho
person will be leader of the above professions or
classes of persons.

8. If K is in his Tm (I shall put hereafter Tm for Thrim-
sameam or JOth division of the zodical sign) he
will be well matched, courageous, liberal, blessed

‘with jewels, adventurous, charming and popular.
If M is in his Tm—sickly, widower, cruel, fond of
others wives, anxious, dirty, owner of several
houses, many servants.

If @ is in his Tm.—wealthy, famous, happy, intelligent,
popular, respected, healthy, hopeful and fond of
enjoyment

lf B occupies his Tm.—intelligent, skillful in music,
showy, political, eloquent, architect,pundit, adven-
turous, popular.

If 8 is in his Tm.—happy, blessed with many children,
good wife, healthy, rich, handsome, oruel hearted,
extremely fond of women.

I£ R is in the Tm of K—a warrior, If C lazy, If R is in
the Tm of M double-hearted, if C fond of killing,
if BR is in the Tm of G blessed with admirable qua-
lities, if C rich, if R is in the Tm of B happy, if C
intelligent and educated, if R is in the Tm. of S
handsome, if C respect among all classes.

CHAPTER XIII.

Female Horoscopes.

Throughout the book, the subject has been treated
without reference to sex arid such effects of plsnctary
combinations as are applicable to both sexes are to be

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 199] =====
(24) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 185

predicted by consulting their horoscopes, but those which
cannot be so dealt with from the peculiarities of their sex
and the nature of their occupations, will be referred to
here, for the information of the reader. Predictions regar-
ding a woman’s complexion. stature and natural grace
will have to be made by the pesition of the Moon and the
birth sign. Her family happiness and the nature of her
husband will have to be found by consulting the 7th house.

1. Birth or Cin even signs with the aspect of benefics,
will give all the feminine grace which raises the
value of a woman as a housewife. If one of them
is in even signs, the woman will be blessed with
ordinary modesty, if both of them are in odd signs
having evil aspect, she will be thoroughly mascu-
line in her behaviour and will be devoid of femi-
nine grace.

2. If C or birth is in A or So, and occupies Tm of K the
girl becomes adulterous before marriage, and if
evil planets aspect she becomes so before puberty,
if in Tm of B double-hearted, if in Tm of M me-
nial servant, if in Tm of G an excellent wife, if in
Tm of § sinful and unchaste.

3. If C or birth is in-Ts or Land occupies Tm of K
adulterous, if in Tm of B versed in music and fine
arts, if in Tm of M she will marry a second time,
if in Tm of G good wife. if in Tm of S moral and
respected among friends and relations.

4. If C or birth isin Gi or V, and occupies Tm of K
clever in dissembling, in Tm of M impotent or
barren, in Tm of G chaste, in Tm of B faithful,
in Tm of § very licentious.

5. If C or birth is in Cr, and occupies Tm of K adulterous,
in Tm of M murders her husband, in Tm of G good

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 200] =====
186 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

children and respect, in Tm of B skillful in pain-
ting and architecture, in Tm of S very licentious.

6. If C or birth is in Lo, and occupies Tm of K manly
and loquacious, in Tm of M unchaste, in Tm of G
good queen, in Tm of B masculine, in Tm of § fond
of incestuous intercourse.

7. If C or birth is in Ss or P, and occupies Tm of K fond
of men, in Tm of M wants little sexual intercourse,
in Tm of G chaste, in Tm of B well informed and
philosophical, in Tm of S adulterous.

8. IfC or birth isin Cs or As, and occupies Tm of K
slave, in Tm of M fond of vulgar fellows, in Tm of
G faithful,in Tm of Badulterous,in Tm of S issueless

9. If S occupies the Navamsas of M or M is in the Na-
vamsas of §, or both aspect each other, or if Ts or
Lis birth and its Navamsa isin As, the woman not
being satisfied with sexual connection with men,
will have recourse to other woman provided with
leather bags in the shape of male organs, tied
to their waist, and enjoy females with such un-
dignified apparatus.

10. If the 7th house from C or birth is not with planets,
not powerful and not aspected by benefics, she will
get a worthless husband, if M or Bis in 7 her hus-
band will be impotent, if 7 is a movable sign
the husband will be constantly travelling, if it is
fixed, the husband will be always at home, if it is
a@ common sign, the husband, will be partly travel-
ling and partly at home, if Risin 7 she will be
rejected or divorced, if K is in 7 aspected by male-
fics, she will become a widow very early in life, if
M is in 7 with the aspect of malefics, she will re-
main unmarried all her life.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 201] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 187

11. If evil planets occupy ,7 she will become a widow,
if there are benefics and malefics in 7 she will
neglect the first husband and marry a second,:
if there is a weak planet in 7 aspected by a good
planet, she will herself be neglected by her hus-
band, if K and S mutually occupy each others
Navamesas she will be very adulterous, if C, S and
K are in 7 the girl commits adultery through her
husband’s consent or connivance.

12. If birth is in Cs, As, A, or So and is occupied by C
and 8, aspected by malefics, the woman as well as
her mother will become adulterous, If 7th Na-
vamsa is A or So and is aspected by M, the wo- ©
man’s private organs will be diseased, if the 7th
house and the 7th Navamsa are good, having the
aspect of benefics, she will have healthy private
parts and will be agreeable to her husband.

13. If 7 is Cs or As, or the Navamsa falls in these houses,
her husband will be old and stubborn, if 7 fallsin A
‘er So, or the 7th Navamea is there, the woman’s
husband will be licentious, revengeful and in-
temperate. IfTs or Lis 7, or the 7th Navamsa,
her husband will be handsome, rich and agree-
able. If Gior V is 7, or the 7th Navamsa, her
husband will be skillful, learned and agreeable.
TfCr is 7, or 7th Navamsa the husband will be
tender-hearted and licentious. If 7 is Ss or P,
or 7th Navamsa, the husband will be a gentle-
man, highly respected and moral, If 7 is Lo, or
7th Navamsa, the husband will be tender heart-
ed and will be engaged in several works.

14, If C and Sare in birth she will be revengeful and
fond of pleasures. If C and Bare there she will

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 202] =====
188 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

be virtuous, fond‘of music, ekillful and happy.
If B and S are there she will be handsome, agree-
able, cheerful and well skilled in fine arts. IfC,S
and G, or C, S and B, or C, G and B occupy, birth,
the girl will be hapyy, chaste, loving, rich and
agreeable.

15. If an evil planet is in 8 the girl becomes a widow. If
good planets occupy 2 while an evil planet is in 8
‘the girl dies before her husband.

When C is in V, So, Ts, or Lo, the woman will have
few sons.

16. If M is neither exalted nor debilitated, S, C, and B
are powerless, and R, K and G are powerful, and
the birth sign falls in odd signs, the girl will be
imperious, manly, courted by lovers and careless
of reputation. IfG, 8, K and B are powerful and
the birth falls in even signs the woman will be
fumous,learned in many departments of knowledge,
religious and god fearing.

CHAPTER XIV.
Death.

1. If 8 is occupied by R death ensues by fire, by C from
water, by K from weapons, by B from fever, by G
from complicated chronic complaints, by S from
thirst, by M from starvation. Ifthe planets are
powerful death ensues under favuurable circum-
stances, if they are weak under distressing circum-
stances.

If 8 is movable, death comes in foreign country,if fixed
in his own house, if common while travelling.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 203] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 189

2. If there are no planets in 8, death must, be predicted.
by the complaint brought on by the aspecting
planet. If K aspects 8, death comes by bilious dis-
ease, if C phlegniatic or windy disease, if K by
excess of heat, if B by a mixture of all tempera-
ments, if G by phlegm, if 8 by phlegm and wind,
if M by flatulence, and death comes from disease
in that organ which is ascribed to the zodiacal
sign. Thus if 8 chances to be A, and is aspected
by R, death ensues by giddiness or biliousness in
the head. If8 is Cr and C aspects it, death comes
by flatulent and phlegmatic complaints in the
heart or organs about it.

8. If R is in 10 and K is in 4, or both of them occupy 10,
death ensues by falling from a peak, or by striking
against arock. If Misin 4, Cisin 7 and K is
in 10, the man dies by falling into a well.

If birth falls in the common sign, and R and C occupy
it, he dies by drowning.

४. 17 © is in Cs and Mis in Cr, death comes by drowning
or dropsy or jalodara. If C is in A or So, and is
between two evil planets there will be death by
fire or weapons. If C isin V between two evil
planets death comes from corruption of the blood.
If C is in Csor As, between two evil planets,
death results from bandages, or fire, or a fall from
high elevation

». If two malefics unaspected by benefics occupy 5 and 9
death results from confinement or bandages. If
P or Cr is 8, and its 8rd Drakkanam is rising at
the time of birth, or if Cs is 8 and its first Drakka-
nam is rising, death comes by ropes being fastened
round him. If P is birth with R, Cin V, with

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 204] =====
190 ASTROLOVICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

malefics, and S occupies A the person will be mur-
dered by his wife in his own house, or she will
arrange for his death through ill feeling.

6. lf Ror Kisin 4and Misin 10, the person will be
crucified, or torn to pieces by means of a spike. If
all evil planets occupy only trienes, he will meet
with a similar death. If R is in 4 and K in 10, and
aspected by weak C, death comes from asharp poin-
ted weapon. If Ris in4and K in 10, and aspected
by M, the person will be beaten to death by sticks.

7. If weak C is in 8, K in 10, Min 1 and Rin 4, there
will be asimilar death. If weak Cisin10,Kin9,
M in 1 and R in 5 the person will be suffocated to
death by smoke, or burnt by fire, or pierced to
death by sharp weapons.

8. If K isin 4, Rin 7 and M in 10, there will be death
by fire, weapons, or through the anger of the king.
If M isin 2, Cin 4and K isin 10, the man will
die by worms geverated in sores on his body.

9. If R is in 10 and K in 4, death results from horsefall,
if K isin 7 and M,C, and Rare inl, the man
suffers death by machinery ‘. 6, on the rack or by
any one of the many means human ingenuity has
invented for the destruction of its own species. 1f
K isin L, Min A, and Cin Cs or As the person
will die by being drowned in nightsoil or in a
dunghill. If weak C isin 10, R in 7 and K in 4,
there will be a similar death.

10. If weak C is seen by powerful K. and M occupies 8,
the person will have incurable venereal disease,
or piles and will die by surgical operation in the
private parts, or by being burnt there, or by the
generation of nasty worms.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 205] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 191

11. IfR isin 7, M in 8, weak C is in 4, the person dies by
being eaten by birds or they will eat his body after
death uncared for. If Risin 1, K in 5, Min 8 and Cis
in 9 the man will die by the stroke of lightning, by
falling from the top of rocks, by falling on the
walls of a house, or by buildings falling on him.

12. If 8 is free and is not aspected by planets and none of
the combinations above noticed are present, then
death must be predicted by that disease which is
attributed to the lord of the 8th, or the lord of
the 22nd Drakkanam from the birth.

13. The nature of the place where a person dies may be
found by referring to the lord of the Navamsa
which is rising at the time of birth. If A, the place
of death will be frequented by sheep and goats, if
‘I's by cattle, if Gi private residence, if Cr watery
places, if Lo forests, if V watery places, if L shops,
if So pits, if Ss places frequented by horses, if Cs
watery places, if As a house, if P watery place, The
places of death may also be found by reference to
the planets. If R places of worship, if C watery
places or bath rooms, if K kitchens and fire rooms,
if B places of enjoyment or pleasure rooms, if G
cash rooms, if S bedrooms, if M dirty places.

Find the Navamea of birth, and see how much of the
sign remains at thetime. This remaining time will be -
the period during which the person dying remains un-
conscious. If the sing is aspected by the lord of the
house, the time of senselessness will be doubled, if good.
planets aspect it the time of insensibility well be trebled,
if the house is aspected by the lord as well as by benefics
the time will be six fold. Take an example. Ts is 44 ghts.
Each Navamsa therefore is} ght. We shall say that a

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 206] =====
192 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

person was born in the first Navamsa. There are 8 Na
vamsas or 4 ghts. still remaining in Ts. If the sign is as-
pected by the lord of the house, and by benefics, the per-
son dying will be insensible for 4x6 ghts—24 ghts. or 9
hrs and 86 minutes before his death. Other worlds than
ours are supposed to exist and the terrestrial creatures in
their incessant rotations become celestial or vice versa. I
shall give a few hints which would enable the reader to
find out whence he came and whither he will go after
death. G is the lord of Devaloka. Cand S are lords of
Pitrulokas, R and K are lords of Thyriaglokas, and B and
M are lords of Narakalokas. Find out who is stronger,
whether R or C and the lord of the Drakkanam occupied
by the more powerful of the two will determine the
world whence the individual has come. If the planet
is exalted the person was ina high position before he
came here, if the planet is not so strong, he was in the
ordinary sphere of life, if the planet is weak or debilita-
ted the person was in a wretched condition. If there are
no planets in 6, 7 and 8, determine which of the Drakka-
nams in 6 and 8 is powerful, and this will indicate the
world to which the person goes after death. If there are
planets in 6, 7 or 8 he goes to that world which is attribu-
ted to the most powerful planet occupying those houses.
If G is in 6, 8 or any one of the quadrants and is exalted
the person will have Moksham or final bliss. If P is birth,
G is in good Navamasas and other planets are powerless,
there will be finalfbliss.
CHAPTER XV.

Lost Horoscopes.

There are some who have lost their horoscopes or
whose horoscopes have never been written for them. The

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 207] =====
(25) ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 193

following hints will be very useful for such persons. It is
desired that those who have lost their horoscopes or who
never had any, should go to an astrologer, with of course
suitable presents, and ask him to cast a nativity for them.
The astrologer after taking the presents, recording the
time, position, place and direction of the parties, should
proceed to calculate the horoscope on the following rules.
Take the time of question and fix the planets as well as
the Lagnam. If the question time falls in the 1st hora,
R must be placed in Oottarayanam, if it is in 2nd hora, R
must be placed in Dakshinayanam. If the question time
falls in lst Drakkanam, G must be placed in the same
sign, if itis in 2nd Drakkanam, G will be in 5, and if it
falls in 8rd Drakkanam, G must be placed in the 9th
house of the question time. Find out which of the Dwa-
dasamsas is rising at the time of question and fix G there.
If the 4th Dwadasamsa is rising, G will be in the 4th house,
if the 8th Dwadasamsa is rising, G will bein the 8th
house. The man’s age is fixed at 120 years, and G moves
round the zodiac once in 12 years. He completes the whole
period of 120 in 10 circles or revolutions. Ask the per-
son to touch any one of the organs of the body. If he
touches feet, ankles or calves the age will be within 12.
If he touches knees or buttocks the age will be between
12 and 24, if thighs, private parts, or testicles 24—36, if
navel or waist 36—48, if belly 48—60, if chest or breast
60—72, if shoulders or neck 72—84, if lips or upper part
of the neck 84—96, if eyes or eyebrows 96—108, if fore-
head or head 108--120.

If R is in question timc, Grishma Rutu, if C Varsha-
rutu, if K Grishmarutu, if B Saradrutu, if G Hemantarutu,
if S Vasantharutu, if M Sasirarutu. If there are no pla-.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 208] =====
194 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR,

nets in the sign, then the lord of the rising Drakanam
determines the Rutu.

If a Rutu comes in an Ayanam in which it does not
occur,then bave reference to the order of the Rutu and fix
a corresponding one in which it falls. Drakkanam deter-
mines the Rutu, and if the question time falls im the first
half (a sign is divided into 30 equal parts and each Drak-
kanam gets 10 parts) or five parts, predict the first
month, if it is the next five parts, fix the second month
of the Rutu. Each sign is divided into 1800 equal
divisions, called Lipthas and each Drakkanam gets
600 Lipthas. As one Drakkanam represents 60 days or
two months, a month gets 300 Lipthas. Ten Lipthas
will be allotted to each day, and this determines the day
of the lost horoscope. Another method is thus given.

Find in what Bhaga (goth) is Rand fix the lunar day with

reference to that. Thusif R is in the 10th, then the
birth time will be Dasami of the bright half of the Lunar
month, and so on for therest. Ifthe question falls in A,
Ts, Gi, Cr, Ss, and Cs, fix the birih time in the day, and
if it falls in Lo, V, L, So, As and P, the time of birth will
be night. Take the time of question and find out how
many Lipthas have been gained over by R, and if the
birth was in night, multiply the Lipthas gained over by R
by the period of the day, and divide the same by the pe-
riod of night, the result indicates the time of birth in the
night.

If the birth was in day time, multiply the Lipthas
passed by R, by the period of night and divide the re-
sult by the period of the day, and the time of birth during
the day will be known. Some astrologers say that the time
of questioning must be the time of birth, There are

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 209] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 195

several other methods of culculation to find lost horos-
copes, and they involve calculations of a difficult nature
and a good deal of familiarity with astrological formulas.
It is not possible to bring them easily before the reader
for his guidance. I have attempted to teach the reader
as much of astrology as could be learnt with the least
trouble, and ifI have succeeded in my object I shall
consider myself very well repaid for the trouble I had to
take in the preparation of this book.

CHAPTER XVI.

Planetary Periods.

‘With this chapter I shall close my work. It is very
essential, for the reader, to know the particular influences
of the Dasas and their sub-periods. I cannot, within the
narrow compass of this little book, go minutely into the
question, but shall confine myself to the general princi-
ples which every reader of astrology ought to know in
making his predictions.

1. If R is exalted, in Moolathrikanam, good Navamsas,
well aspected, in favourable signs, he gives spices,
tigers and lions claws, ivory, skins of wild animals,
gold, courage, cruel disposition, travelling, friend-
ship among kings and chiefs, wars, wealth from
these sources, inclination to do noble work, fame,
invincible courage and resolution to conquer his
foes. When R is debilitated, occupies an unfrien-
cly house, or is in bad sub-divisions, aspected by
evil planets, be makes the man hate his wife, chil-
dren, friends, relations, enemies and thus get in-
to constant, mess with them, the man also wastes

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 210] =====
196 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

his money on evil purposes, becomes sinful, quar-
rel some with his own servants and dependants,
diseased in heart, has bowel complaints.

2. IfC is exalted, occupies a favourable position and
auspicious sub-divisions, aspected by good planets,
she gives the person during her period, much res-
pect, different varieties of sugar, jaggery, sweet
things, gains from superior castemen, fine flowers,
sweet scents, plenty of milk, ghee, curd, clothes,
good jolly company, varieties of oil seeds, rich
food and happiness from wife and children. If C
is weak, aspected by evil planets and occupies un-
favourable divisions or houses, she gives to the
person, quarrels among kinsmen, female children,
drowsiness, patience, evel reputation, religious turn
of mind, loss of money and misunderstanding among
his own followers and men of power and position
who are able to help him.

38, If K is exalted, in Moolathrikonam, lord of favourable
division, aspected by benefics and is powerful, he
makes the man successful in military operation,
courageous,conqueror among his foes, gains, wealth
from kings, brothers, sisters, enemies, lands and
woollen stuffs, successful in war, famous, undergo
hair breadth escapes, travel in different countries,
and gives him good vehicles and conveyances.
Butif unfavourable there will be cuts from weapons,
burns from fire, disease from excess of heat, mis-
understanding with wife, children, cousins, brothers,
sisters, elderly sort of gentlemen, priests, much
thirst from fever, biliousness, venereal complaints,
licentious inclinations, irreligious or immoral
thoughts and quarrels with his wellwishers.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 211] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 197

4. If B is powerful, well aspected, exalted and is occupy-
ing favourable sub-divisions, he gives gains
from religious committees, gambling, friends, elder-
ly gentlemen, respect among educated and intel-
ligent men, gains in gold, brass, bellmetal, horses,
lands, popularity, happiness, intelligence, wit and
humour, fondness to crack jokes, charitable dis-
position, patience to serve well under the ruling
classes. If unfavourable the following results
happen—quarrels, sorrow, misery, confinement,
mental worry, imprisonment, diseases of all descri-
ptions arising from various canses.

5. If G is powerful the following may be predicted—good
intellectual development, self respect, reasonable
courage, humility, attractive appearance, loss
to his enemies, philonthropic views, love for noble
work, skill in deplomacy, goed counsel, encourage-
ing principles of justice, knack to please state
officers, gains in gold, horses, children, elephants,
clothes, friendship, regard among kings of several
countries and great respect among religionists. If
unfavourable the following results happen—mental
anxiety from verbal contests, disease in the ears,
hatred among the irreligious and rascally people,
service under undesirable masters, misunderstand-
ing between good friends, loss from cultivation,
thefts by different servants, loss of sons, wife and
elderly gentlemen, incurring the displeasure of
kings or protectors, unjustified blames, mental
worry, misery from various sources and quarrels
among his own children, especially sons.

6. If S is good—taste for] music, dancing and fine arts,
sweet scents, luxurious food, splendid horses and

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 212] =====
198 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

carriages, highly flavoured drinks, rich clothes,
excellent women, enjoyment of sensual pleasures,
grand furniture, soft beds and inviting cushions,
flowers, sandal, betel leaves, high gentlemanly
sense, generous disposition, love for friends, rela-
tionsand family, success in mercantile speculations,
finding hidden treasures, agricultural happiness,
and wealth from various sources. If S is bad—
hated by people of all classes, displeasure of kings,
quarrels with executioners and huntsmen, fores-
ters and villainous people, grief from friends, loss
of daughters, loss of wife or troubles from such
sources.

7. If M is good—gains from mules, donkeys, camels, buf-
faloes, kites, eagles or such other beasts and birds,
connection with old women, leader of his communi-
ty, respect as a citigen,authority over lots of work-
ing classes, gains from inferior grains, loss of
father or elderly relations, distrust of the rulers
under whom he works. IfM is bad—sorrowful,
phlegmatic disease, biliousness, giddiness, deep
rooted enmity, lazy, dirty, always given to drink
and sleep, quarrels among servants, menials, wife
and children, injury to limbs or loss of them by
disease or cuts, loss from cattle and lands, evil
reputation, dirty houses, and there will be-unheard
of misery from various sources.

8. If Tis good—great power, much courage, success
among different classes, influential friends, gains
from cereals of all descriptions, good children, wife
and servants, travelling, adventures, headache,
piles, internal. disorders, impious thoughts and
irreligious tendencies. If T is bad—heart-disease,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 213] =====
ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR. 199

fear from enemies, arson, fires and weapons, des-
truction of friends and relations, losses from thieves,
vagabond, dacoits, thugs and other disturbers of
peace, anger of the king, loss of children, wife,
parents and grand parents.

9. If Kt is good—undaunted courage, political success,
good education, friends, houses and eminent posi-
tion. If Kt is bad—troubles from relations, cou-
sins, family, thieves, arson, wild beasts, dysentry,
gonohrea, cutaneous eruptions, imprisonment and
losses from those whom the person has most
trusted.

I have treated the subject very generally and I could
not help it,as any detailed information would simply
swell the bulk of the volume beyond reasonable limits.

- From the very nature of the subject and the vastness of
the terrestrial phenomena it treats of, no book could be

exhaustive. But if, time and convenience permit me, I

shall take the earliest opportunity to bring outa more

exhaustive treatise which will contain a good deal of in-
formation, which the advanced astrological student will
find interesting and instructive. A sublime subject like
astrology, could uever even for a moment, be uninteresting,
and if it was neglected by the majority, they simply did so
because none took the trouble to introduce the subject in
an inviting and interesting form. I have led the reader
through a good deal of information which bas been care-
fully collected from the ancient Sanscrit astrological
works. This progress must lead us to consider somo of
the most successful attempts made by human genius to
solve the mysteries of the great Universe. I have dwelt
with much that invites great reflection and speculation,
and which might be explained Ly the thoughtful study of

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 214] =====
200 ASTROLOGICAL SELF INSTRUCTOR.

evidence already obtained from various scientific sources,
but there is much more which cannot be so explained,and
which perchance may continue for many years quite per-
plexing. I have in fine dealt with a subject which is full
of practical interest, but whose true significance and real
grandeur, as well as its vast difficulties are but now be-
ginning to be rightly understood. The skill of the ancient
Rishis, who found out the results of the planetary influen-
ces on the terrestrial phenomena and recorded them in so
many formulas, for the guidance of mankind, is unsur-
passed by any modern discovery or invention, and before
we make up our minds to call them fools, we must make
every honest effort to see that that appellation may not be
fastened on us by future generations. Knowledge is
power, and must continue to be so inspite of the clatter of
idle mouths,

भर्ग”

THE END.

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 215] =====
APPENDIX.
ILLUSTRATIVE HOROSCOPES,
No. 1, Living, passed 32 years.

Born at 5 A.M. on 20th January 1861 in the year Roudri on
the 9th Solar day of Capricornus.

- In a high position, adoption, two wives, lest one wife, lost two
children, intelligent, limited education.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

९5 Moon, न | pn
[कि Kotha
Sun Rasee. द्र Navamsa.

। | Mer- piter aay Sa-
eury. Sa- न्न (~ पि turn.
Rahu. turn. ahu.
onl | | | Mars.| Birth. Moon

|

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. 2—Living, passed 30 years.
Born 22nd February 1863. In the year Dundubhi, 12th of Solar
Month Aquarius. Born 33 minutes after 8 P. M.
Is an Indian Prince, broken education, intelligent, has children,
one wife, much weulth and power, bad speaker, adepted, fond of

riding, hunting and musio, economical, lost one son; has more
daughters than sons.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

=
Venus] Moon.) otha —
6
= ॥ turn.
Rasee. 9 [——— Navamsa.
Mer- Mavs
cury. Rahu.
I Birth.
Ju- . Ju- |
Raho. piter. = piter. |

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 216] =====
202 AVPENDIX.

No. 3—Living, passed 53 years.

Born. 20th solar month Virgo in the year Vikari, Sslivahana

Era 1761.

Evening 20 minutes after 4 o’clock. Has two connections,

broken education, self made maa, in good position, childless, imperi-
ous, redundant speaker, energetic and active, careless of personal

comforts, liberal.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1
Rahn. cury. Sun
:
Rabu, | ष
Rasee. ae eS
M Vv
‘enw
[ees Sun | (ध.
न ~ Ju- | Mer- piter. Mars
turn. | Piter. | cury Sa- (1८९1)
(प 61978 turn.

 

 

‘No. 4.—Living, passed 34 years.

Born 22nd March 1858, 3 o’clock in the morning on the 11th day

in the solar month of Pisces in the year Kalayukthi.

Married twice, no issués, in good position, intelligent, broken

education, speculative, indifferent health, close fisted.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

eas] po

Mer-| Ju-

(६ क | न्य, Moon, | Bahn.

enus

Sa-

Rahu. Moon.

——|_ Rasee. ---— | Navamsa. |———

| Birth Keth |

वि EES Sun |p:
I Birth
Mars. Ju- | Mer-| 89

iter | cury turn.
ethu| Mars. “

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 217] =====
APPENDX. 203

No. 5.—Living, passed 53 years.

Born on 14th of solar month Scorpio in 1761 Salivahana Saks
of the year Vikari at 7—18, in the morning.

Has good landed estate and ordinary official position, nearly
dozen living children, intelligent, limited education, liberal, jolly
and obliging.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mer-
Rahu, cury.
^
r= Birth|
---- | 22866. (त्त Navamsa. |——
Kethu ter
Moon] Sa-
turn.
Birth
Sun च
-Mars Jupi- Kethul
Mer- foo ter, {Venu Sun. | Mars,| ens
cury. |

 

 

 

No. 6.—Living, passed 43 years.

‘Born on 18th of solar month: Aries of the year Soumya, :Saka
1772, 583. ghatikas afte: Sun rize. . A high judicial officer, well-edu-
cated and informed, issueless, $wo; wives, talkative, tair looking aid
enthnsiastic,

 

   

 

=
Sa- | Sun ¦
turn. | Mer- res
cury.
Mars
KK ethul
Rasee. .

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 218] =====
204 APPENDIX.

No. 7.—Living, passed 60 years.
Born on the 14th, Monday of the bright half of the Lunar month

 

 

 

 

 

 

Aswija in the year Nandana—A high legal officer, well educated, in-
telligent, 3 children born and died early so now issueless, jolly,
writer of some works, liberal and obliging, pieless, many connections.
Moon
Jupi- Mars. | Birth.
ter.
Rahu,|
Rasee.
~
Sun
Saturn
Venus! or.
cury.

 

 

 

 

 

No. 8.— Living, passed 51 years.
Born on 21st Solar day in the month of Aquarius in the year
Plava (1841) about 15 minutes to 1 o’clock on that night.
- Has taken the English degree of Barrister-at-law, many issues
died only one surviving, intelligent, liberal, holds a high official po-
sition, dark complexion,bad health, checkered life, frank and obliging.

oi |
Mer-
cury.

 

 

 

 

स [| | ,
Base. |——]

 

Rahu |
Venus)

|
Birth
Saturn
Jupi-
ter.

 

Moon,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

भ क

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 219] =====
APPENDIX, | 205

No 9.—Died 2ith August, 1891,
Lived more than 75 years.

Born on 6th Solar day in the month of Cancer in the year Dathu
Sak 1739. About 15} ghatikas after Sunrise—helda decent official
position, saved a fair sum, had a beautiful wife who died 23 years
before his death, closefisted, short tempered, good health, and in-
dustrious all through this long life, self respect, independent, had 7
children of whom 4died during his life. Died during the last period
of Saturn in Jupiter’s sub-period. Acquainted with SJanguages.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| i
aS Mer- |
Moon.} Rahu,| cury. cury- Mars
—— - poo :
un
Venus Kethu
-----| Base [` -----| ` ॥ Tan
Sa- Jupi- Venus
turn. Mars. ter. Rahu | `
ee a _jSaturn
| (= | ५ | |
Kethu| Jupi- Moon.! Birth.
| ter. le

 

 

No. 10.—Died in 1871 in his 72nd year.

Born on 6th lunar day of the dark half of the Adhika Sravanam
in the year Kalayukthi, Saka, 1720. Self made, earned lacs of rupees,
spent in good purposes, had 14 children by one wife, of whom 7 died

during his life, wife died 8 years before his death, poet, intelligent,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 220] =====
206 AVPERDIX. *

high official, independent aud very bold, adventurer, founder of cha-
ritable institutions -

 

Fi ae Jee
Moon, Riter turn

पशप

 

1 Sun

 

——| 28866

Mer-
cury.

 

Kethu!

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘o. 11.—Died in hie 38th yeer. --
Born on the 12th day of thé Solar rhonth df Taurus iw the fyear
Parividavi (1853) about 19 ghatikas after Sunrise.
Two wives, issueless, astrologer of some fame, charitable, well
respected among the higher circles, paralysis 4 years before his
death, good earning.

~
cury Venu
Sa- | 52") Baha
turn.

 

 

Mars.
Moon.

 

———|  Rasee,

 

Ju- |p,
ethu piter. Birth

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 221] =====
APPENDIX, | 207.

Ne 1%.—-Died in his Slst year.

Born on the 2nd day of the Solar month of Virgo in the year
Durmati Shaka Salivahana 1783.

Thin tall, dark man, short sighted, tasteful, friendly high educa-
tion, familiar with several subjects, three children, constant failures,
perserving loving and obliging. ^

 

 

च imme
Kethi fs Mer-
cury.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rasee. (स (| Navamsa.
Moon, ग्भः
Saturn
Ju-
Birth र Mars | piter.| Moon.
Rahn, : Venus] Sa- | Rabu.
भ turn.

 

 

 

No. 18.—Died in 1677 in her 27th year.

Born 12th धथ of the bright half of the lunar month Bhadrapa-
da in the year lharana (1850) 19} ghatikas after Sunrise. ॥
ir looking, strong woman, we connected, two children, good

marriage, passionate, step mother, intelligent and obedient wife,
economical,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

५ | Ju- Mer-
turn, | . enue) piter. cury
| ETE
Rasee, Sun | Navamsa. |—
Moon Sa-
Kethu turn, Mara.
Rahu.
Sun (
Birth, Venus ise Birth, | (८ ।
Mery,

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 222] =====
208. | APPENDIX. 1
| नै

No. 14,—Died in 1891 in his 27th year. 4

Born on the 26th Solar day in the month of Leo in the yesr र
kthakshi Saka Salivahana 1786, 48} ghatikas after Sunrise.

Born in poverty, obedient, dark, ordinary education, unmarried,
brothers and sisters, incestuous connection, long“illness before death. |

 

   

i oe ee ee | | 1 Mer- |
Kethu} Mars.| Birth Wenus} cury | =
"Rabu. Ma

 

 

Tun.

i |
| |
. i {
("| 086९, |
|
|

 

। |
| Jupi- [ eur
ter नि bw. tur

1४

Moon

 

eet

i 07
(० क ore sate wee

५

क `

| ॐ, |
i > NLD ध 4

===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 223] =====


===== [astrological-self-instructor-1893 | PDF page 224] =====


