Brihat Samhita (1877) - Varahamihira
Translator: H. Kern | Coverage: PARTIAL: Kern translation parts 1-6 only; scan ends with a handwritten 'to be continued'. Mundane/natural astrology, not natal
Cite as (slug, PDF page). Verify against the page image before trusting a rule.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 1] =====
pris
21१
Ae

ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY

or

GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.

श HE BRHAT-SANHITA

COMPLETE SYSTEM OF NATURAL ASTROLOGY
OF VARAHA-MIHIRA. /

$ ८८

. TRANSLATED FROM SANSKRIT INTO ENGLISIL.

ar

Da. H. KERN.

५६ 1-6”
PART, MI.

“Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 2] =====
८

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 3] =====
THE BRHAT-SANHITA
COMPLETE SYSTEM OF NATURAL ASTROLOGY
OF VABAHA-MIHIRA.

TRANSLATED FROM SANSKRIT INTO ENGLISH.

.Br Dz. H. KERN.

 

Onartzs L
। Introduction.

1. Victory to the Allsoul, the source of life, the inseparable
ornament of heaven, the Sun, who is adorned with a crown of
s thousand beams like unto liquid gold!

2, After studying the subject matter which former Seers'
have revealed with infallible truth, I purpose to treat of the
eame in an easy style, and in verses neither too few nor too
many.

8. Should any one think that an ancient work, as being
made by Seers, is good, and that a book by a human suthor
is not, (then I would fain ask) what difference it makes in
the statement, however different the wording may be, if the
thing told remain the same?* The Holy Writ is here
-excepted.

' The commentator, Utpala, takes WWHAfH as ‘the first seer, vis.
Brahma,’ bat WegfeyEre, not being identical with WTETTWETC, points
to a plurality of infallible authors, although it Is true that Brahma, the
Creator, is, of course, the very first astronomer in the Hindu system.
The word Weyat does not necessarily mean ‘ first’—Cf. v. 5.

* To understand Variha’s meaning, one must bear in mind that the
Rehis, Munis, in a technical sense, are superhuman beings. They are
no more men than, ¢.g. angels, devils, VidyAdharas, Rakshasss, etc.,
are. In enumerations of the various beings, they are classed apart from
men, devas, demons, ete., 6.9. p- 95, 1 20:

QaQuafaarrargza:. Rehis and Devas, however, get often coa-
founded, because both are manifestations of light, as stars, the sun,
Planets, lightalng, the hearth-fire, otc. or rather the spirits, the

. . . 4

 

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 4] =====
११८१

4. Whether the words run thus: “The week day presided
over by Mars is not auspicious,” as we read in the work ~
issued by Brahma; or thus: “Tuesday is an unlucky day ;”
what (real) difference is there in the two works, one of which
is made by a man, the other by a heavenly being ?

5. Having taken notice of the numerous works that have
come from Brahma, eto., in succession, I now undertake this
composition. My aim is to give an epitome of those works.

6. Once this world was darkness (chaos). On its waters
was a golden egg of light, one half of which was heaven, the
other earth. In it Brahma was born, the maker of all things,
he whose eyes are the Sun and Moon. .

7. Kapila declares Matter, Kanida Substance, eto., to be
the cause of the universe; some proclaim that Time, others
that Spontaneousness, others again that Action is the cause.'

Spiritual powers of those manifestations. It would be difficult to decide
Whether Agal is a dese,'or a rishi, kavi; indeed, be Is now the one,
them the ether. A curious passage is found in MahbSbhirata (ed.
_Boubey), xil. 210, 21, where Girgys (another form of Garga), the cele-
brated mythical astronomer, is mentioned :

जन्य नारदो Re aca घनुेहम्‌ ।

Qaftettd and: wentafefatent a .
Here is devarshicaritem, the mythological phrase for jyotishimgeti. -
Gargs himself is clearly a meteoric phenomenon ; see, ¢.g. MabAbb. vil.

190, 34:

सिकताः yoett wht wrefiren wether: |

art feces qere® ayia: a
‘This ls pretty clear, at least to all who have no preconceived notions,
and have taken the pains of spelling the alphabet of mythology before
they ventured into its higher regions. It would seem that gerge origi-
nally denoted ‘thander, lightning,” as a derivative from gerj. It is
the mascaline form of yeryé. When real mea, ss Pipinl, are called
Rehis by posterity, it is Aoneris ceusd ; and this is natural enough,
because rehi, muni, kavl, have, besides their technical meaning, the
mere general one of ‘seer,’ ‘a wise mas,’ ‘ poet,’ notions which are
constantly weed as synonyms in Sanskrit and other languages.
5 Although the six categories (pedérthe) of Sabstance, Quality,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 5] =====
3

8. But enough of this; for to decide all incidental quee-
tions would require too. much time. Here I have only to
determine what the divisions are of the Jyotihcistra, or
Science of the Stars. .

9. The Jyotihgistra, treating of several subjects, is con-
tained in three branches. A complete course of it is termed
by the Seers Sanhité. In one branch are to be found the
motions of the heavenly bodies, as determined by calculation :
this is called Tantra, or doctrinal part. The second branch
is Horoscopy, or the casting of the horoscope. Something
different is the third branch.!

10, The retrograde and post-retrograde motion,’ the heli-
acal setting and rising, eto., of the five planets, are expounded `
by me in my work on mathematical astronomy. I have also
copiously treated the nativity, which is contained in the
“ Horoscopy,” and along with it the prognostications for
marching and weddings. ` ॥

11. Whilst omitting questions, answers, tales, which are
of little use, the origin of the planeta, and other fatile things,
I shall set forth what is essential and real in all points.

Action, Generality, Speciality, Inherence, are the foundation of Kapida's

System (see Vaic. Sit. 1, 4), they are nowhere said, at least to my

knowledge, to be the cause of the universe, It appears that the state-

t of our author Is not accurate. Those who represent Time to be

the first cause are, as Utpala rightly observes, the mythologists (pauré-
pikds). He quotes a well-kuown verse from the Mabibh.:
कालः सुवति भूतानि कालः संहरति प्रवाः।

कालः सुतेषु जागर्ति काणो हि दुरतिकरमः॥ ....
Spontancousness is the cause, according to the Laukfyatikas; Action,
in a collective sense, according to the MimAisakas, or followers of the
Pirva-Mimiist. Their tenet is shortly expressed in those words:

पू्वजन्रार्थितं यशु कमि पुंसां युभायुमम्‌ ।

ag ata सुष्ठियंहारकारवम्‌ ॥
From this, however, it does not necessarily follow that the material
world, too, is an effect of Action. .
+ Bee Pref. to the text, p. 23.
* On ensvekre ove Indische Studien, x. p, 905, ovg.,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 6] =====
Ounarrer II.
Astrologer’s Vade-mecum.
‘We ehall now proceed to give an exposition of the astrolo-
ger's vade-mecum. 3
. An astrologer ought to be of good family, friendly in his
appearance, and fashionable in his dress ; veracious, and not
malignant. He must have well-proportioned,! compact and
fall limbs, no bodily defect, and be a fine man, with nice
hands, feet, nails, eyes, chin, teeth, ears, brows, and head,
and with a deep and clear voice; for generally one’s good
and bad moral qualities are in unison with one’s personal
Sppearance. Now, good qualities in a man are, that he is
pare, clever, free, eloquent, ready-witted, able to discern time
and place,? good in the highest sense of the word ; not timid
in society, unsurpassed by his fellow students, skilful, not
addicted to bad passions, well versed in the arte of expiation,
of procuring prosperity, of incantation, and of anointing ;?
farther, that he is regular in worshipping the gods, in his
observances and fasts; that he is able to raise the prestige
of science by the wonderful perfection of his branch of study,
and to solve satisfactorily any question, except in cases wherein
_ Supernatural agencies baffle human calculation ; finally, that
he knows both text and meaning of the works on Mathe-
matical astronomy, Natural astrology, and Horoscopy.
a ग 2 ¢, which is wrong; read Wag®.

* Utpala explains ', as though it applied only to astro- .

logy, but it is more likely that the word must be taken in its more
general sense.
* Since the translation gives an inadequate idea of the terms used in
the original, the comment on it is coped here in full:
खत्पातप्रतीकारा्ं वेदोल्मन्पाठविनिथोनागुाता श्रान्तिकविया-

fa आयुधनादिष्वधिकरखं पौषटिकविद्या तदमिच्वः ! छल्धावेता-

त
पष्यलानादिषु ra

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 7] =====
5

As to Mathematical astronomy, he must know the divisions
of heaven and of time, in ages, years, half-years, scasons,
months, half-monthe, days, watches, hours (;!, of a day), half-
hours, minutes, respirations, moments, subdivisions of a mo- ,
ment, ofo.,' as taught in these five Siddhintas: the Peulica,

८० दामो -होरााटमानः । मुतो “हः (५५. hero a half
nycthemeroa) WEST: | wet Wier wetcrewedy: 1 प्रायः
अआसनिमपरषेशो । बुटिखपु्िमेषदयम्‌ । शुग्धवयवस्वदधः । तथाच
भगवान्परा्रः।

ावता काेनावितमसरमुचचारयते ख निमेषः | निभेषदथं जटिः ।
चिद्यं खवः। खवदयं चयः। दथ चयाः काहा । ee TET: wT |
द कला नालिका । नाजिकादयं सुतः । विशत दिनमिति ।
According to this system there is no connection between the division of
time and that of the circles of heaven, The system in which both

divisions are made to correspond with each other may be held to be a
fruit of the introduction of Greek science. It is given by Utpala as

follows: W%q (in another system than Paricara's) STAR: area

WIM | RTS षद्‌ पाला विघरिका । विषरिकानां wear चरिका

(५० ०५०० ५ नाडी ० नालिका) । घटिकानां षष्वा दिनम्‌ \ दिनानां

विता मासः। मासा दादश वधं भवति ॥ अव चेष वथा तत्यरावां

विलिज्ञा भवति । विखि्तानां षच्या लिप्ना भवति । ferret war

भावः। भागानां चिंता राभिः राथिद्राद्कं मख इति ॥ तथाव

ब्रह्मसिदधान्ते। , । .

भाधेविनाङिका (खात्‌?) wfgdfrer fonfrerwen ।

अटिकाषथ्या दिवसो दिवसानां धिता माखः ॥

मासा दादश वर्प विकलाणिपतां्राभ्रिभगयाग्यः ।

चेषविभागस्युष्डः काचन विनाडिकायेन ॥

तथाच पौलिभे । , .

षर्‌ प्राणाखु विनाडी तत्वथया नाडि दिनं वचया (vis. nigikindm) |,

दिवसाच्तिंशखासो मािकीदादथ्मिरण्दः ॥

कथ्या तु तत्पराखां विकला तत्धष्टिरपि कला तासाम्‌ ॥
दादश भवक्रम्‌ ॥

Moreover Aryabhata (Siddh. 3, 3), is quoted. *

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 8] =====
Bomaks, Visishtha, Saura, and Brahma Siddhintas. Hoe
must know the reason why there are four kinds of monthsa—
the solar, natural, stellar, and lunar months,—and how it
happens that there are intercalary months and subtractive
days! He must know the beginning and end of the Jovian
cycle of sixty years, of the lustrums, years, days, hours (¥; of
.a day), and their respective lords. He must be able to explain
in what respect the reckoning after solar time shows similarity
or difference, compared with the lunar, stellar, and natural
reckoning of time, and to what use each of these is adapted
or not. And when there is discrepancy between the Siddhin-
tas, he must be able to prove experimentally, by means of .
the agreement between the shadow and the clepsydra, botween
observation and calculation, at what moment the sun has
reached the solstitial point, and at what time of the day (alias,
at how many ghatikas) the sun enters the prime vertical.?
He must know the cause. of the swift and slow motion, the ©
northern and southern course, and the moving in an epicycle
of the sun and the other planets. He must foretell the
moment of commencement and separation, the direction,

* 2० अधिमास see Siddh. Girom. (p. 49, 22, and 271, ed. Bépd-
Deva); cf. Sarya 8. Trans. 1. 40, note. For Waetfa(a plurale tantum)
see Siddh. (irom. p. 372 and 22. Utpals ssys concisely: WAYATH-
खावनमानयोरन्तरादवमोत्पश्िः । चादर मानं यावत्सावनमानेन
मीयते तावन्ति परतिवधं षड्‌ दिणान्दधिकतराखि न पूर्यन्ते । तानवे
चोनराचवाच्यानि तिजोनां ग्यूनता * वमानि । From the Brihme. .
Biddh. ७ १००५०, शद्चिसावनदिवसान्तरमवमानीति.

* ‘The translation follows Utpala, who divides the sentence in this
=०००८ ; खदनयोद चिद्योक्रथोया निनुन्भिर्गिवरतेनम्‌ । तखा अपि
अतिपादभे कुशलः । तथा सममष्डलरेदाखुखयोगाभ्युदितां धानाव

YAS: & There would have been more symmetry in the
style If the author had written: Firg®: (vis. प्रतिपादने). It is, after
all, quite possible that the manus exctoris really is fWyR:. * Instead
of WTQTHATM® the Comm. reads WTYTERT?, and explains accord-
ingly WTTET ATT wa wee WENT wat eNE wea
कपाथवर्तरीपीडैः काणपरिष्डेदकिः ।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 9] =====
7

measure, duration, amount of obscuration, colour, and
place (where visible) of the eclipses of san and moon; also
the future conjunctions and hostile encounters of the nine
planets. He must be skilful in ascertaining the distance of
each planet from the earth, expressed in yofanas; further, the
dimension of their orbits, and the distance of the places on
earth, in yoyanas.! He ought to be clever in geometrical
operations and in the caloulation of time, in order to deter-
mine the form of the earth, the circuit of ‘the circle of aster-
isms, eto.; the depression of the pole, the diameter of the
day-circle, the ascensional differences in time, the rising of
the signs, the ghafikas corresponding to the shadow of tho |
gnomon, and such like processes. If, moreover, he knows
how to speak pithily, because he thoroughly understands all
sorts of captious questions; if the science he expounds, by
being put to the test by his own exertion and unceasing
study, has become more refined—like gold is rendered purer .
by being put on the touchstone, by purification in fire, and by
careful workmanship—then he may be said to be a scientific
man.

It has been said

1. “How can one who solves no difficulty, nor answers any
question, nor teaches his pupils, bo styled a scientific man P

2. The ignorant person who knows the words wrongly, —
interprets the sense wrongly, and performs the operations
wrongly, may be compared to one who praises his grand.
mother in presence of his grandfather on account of her
meretricious arts.

3. The words of one who instructs will not be sterile if he
thoroughly understands his science, accurately knows the
rising of the signs by means of the shadow and the clepsydrs,
and is familiar with the contents of the Horoscopy.

* Here iso part of the Commentary: TRAUES WAR Wrote
Rat परिचरे विद्ाजे पहः । यणा अमुको यह एतावज्नियोवनिरमू-
अोलादुपरि धमति । यहथोजनव्ये जानातोत्व्ः। तथा कच्याप्रमाद-
परिच्छेदकुशलः । अगुकल प्हसतावन्ति कच्लायोबनानि । मध्यमो
` अहो यच धमति तदुत्तज्नानमिद्ेः ॥ 1४० ग्ण्ण कं ६०००७७० 2०9

the * half-diameter.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 10] =====
8

Tt has been said also by the most honourable Vishnugupta :
4. “A eca-faring man may, owing to the wind, possibly
reach the opposite shore of the ocean, but never will any one,

unless he be s Reshi, reach, even in his thoughts, the other .

side of the ocean called ‘Time.’”!

In Horosoopy are the following topics: the power or weak-
nees belonging to the signs, half-signs, third-parts, ninth-
parts, twelfth-parts, and degrees ;* the determination of the
power of thé seven planets, which is various, as depending
upon the direction, the place occupied, the moment and the
contention ;* the temperaments, bodily elements, substances, .
caste, and sphere of activity, etc., that belong to the depart- -
ment of each planet ;* conception, time of birth, prognostica-
tion of prodigious accessories, instant death of the child,®

* The compound WTNGTY means ‘time-person,’ ie. ‘ time-per-
sonified,’ which in English is simply expressed by writing Time with
a capital.

* Om these terms Variha-mihira dilates (Brb. Jat. 1, 5-20, and Laghu-
Jat. 1. 8-20, in Ind. Studien, fi. p. 278-82).

* An explanation of these terms Is also met with in the Brhaj-
JAtakam, vis. of feTqy in 9, 19; ० कालबल ७ 2, 31; ० चेष्ठावख
oe Ufa in 9, 20.

* ^ ¢० ग्रहति, ४५ ।५, वातपिकचचष्माव्रकलवं, ०० 219. ०७८. 9, 8;
for घातु,  वसासुद्ां सभेरो"खिमस्जगुक्राणि, १० 9, 11; for Ta,
ताज्रादि 9 19; for arf 2, 7; Bat (explained by faery ‘em-
ployment,’ has the more general sense assigned to it in the translation);
see 3, 1, from the words TTATHY रविशोतम्‌ इ आ.

° एष्य, ष्०्य, सद्योमरणं र५ रिष्टाध्यायः; ४७६ 19 to say, the
sedyomerayem, ‘instant death,’ is treated In the न्यः ०० रिष्ानि
* fatal signs,’ chapter 6 of the Brhaj-jatakam, FCETWTY:. That only
rish{e. and not erish(c, can have this sense, is a matter of course.
Nevertheless, we often meet with Wty in the MSS., where
FTE is required; and not only scribes, but even some authors,
seem to have confeunded beth words, as appears from Indian lexico-
graphers (sce Dict. by Bobtlingk and Roth, .. GCG). The origin of
the rather strange confusion must be a mis-read Uf@Y, which means
the same as fy.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 11] =====
duration of life, destiny and intervening changes of it, the
most favourable combinations of planetary positions as may
exist in theory, the constellations under which kings are born,
the lunar constellations, the constellations formed by only
two planeta, eto., the celestial constellations, eto., and the con-
eequences of all these; descent and character, the planetary
aspects, manner of death, state after death, state in a former
birth ; the good or bad symptoms at the-:moment of consulta-
tion, the calculation of a lucky period for weddings and other
ceremonies.

In the Yatr4, or work containing prognostics for marches,
is treated of: good or evil dates, week days, karanas, hours -
(of 48 minutes), the horoscope, constellations, trembling of
the body, dreams, the anointment for securing victory, the
sacrifice to the planets, the offering to the goblins, the fore-
tokens of the fire, the gestures of elephants and horses, the
talk and spirit of the troops, the measures of policy in con- -
formity with the forebodings of the planets, the auspicious and
evil auguries, the ground for encampments, the colour of the
fire, the uso to be made, after circumstances, of ministers,
spies, envoys, and savages, and the expedients for taking the
strongholds of the enemy.

By a great master has been said

6. “The teachings of one whose theoretical and practical
knowledge of astronomy’ has, so to say, spread abroad every:
where, and is engraved, as it were, in his thoughts, and fixed
in his heart, are not fruitless.” :

An astrologer must also’ be accomplished in natural astro-
logy, in which the following matters are contained: the

1 All these subjects form the argument of Brhaj.-jat., from chap. 8 to
25. The word Wa has here the meaning expressed’ in the transla-
tons WEMAACTA TAT, says Utpale on Beh. Jat. 25, 13.

* ९०८४. च्छ शास्र चन्दः सभमयं भवदश्चागेन सहितं संयुक्तं

ite The addition of gaxite Is not exact, for this is contained
in gdstram, the theoretical part of the science. The word farfiqypay ia
the text has to be changed into fiyqyrq, in spite of all MSS. The
esror is very common, yet an error, and a ludicrous one.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 12] =====
10

course of the sun and of the other eight planets, and, during
it, their natural and unnatural symptoms, their size, colour, _
brightness of the rays, their shape, risings and settings, their
roads and deviations, their retrograde and post-retrograde
motions, the conjunctions of plancts with asterisms, their
course through the asterisms, eto., as well as the respective
consequences for the different parts of the globe; the course
/ of Canopus, the course of the Seven Seers (Great Bear), the
division of things as belonging to the domain of each planet,
the same as appertaining to the domain of each asterism, the
conjunotion of the five planets in the figure of a triangle, etc.,
the planetary war, the conjunction of the five planets with
the moon, the effects produced by the planets on the years ~
presided over by them, the symptoms of pregnancy of the
clouds, the conjunction of the moon with Rohini, with Svati,
with Ashidb4; the forebodings of instant rain, the conclusion -
to be drawn from the growth of flowers and plants as to the
produce of trees and crops, the mock-sun, the halo, the cloudy
line piercing the sun’s disc at rising or setting, the wind, the
meteors, the glow of the aky, the earthquake, the glowing red
of twilight, the Fata Morgana, the dust rain, the typhoon,
the cheapness or dearth of the products of the earth, the
prognostics for the growth of corn, the banner of Indra, the
rainbow, architecture, palmistry, the auspicious or ill-lucky
movements of crows, the augural circle, the movements of
wild beasts, of horses, the circle of winds, the good or bad
signs of temples, of statues, the consecration of statues, the
treatment of trees, the observation of the soil for finding veins
of water, tho lustration, the sight of wagtails, the allaying
the influence of portents, miscellaneous matters, the anoint-
ment of a king;! the signs of swords, of ornamental gold-
plates, of cooks, of tortoises, of cows, of goats, of horses, of
elephants, of men, of women ; reflections on womankind ; the

* The ceremony denoted here by the प्ण चुतकम्बलम्‌ 's commonly
called YUTRTHE; see ch. 48, v. 8, and Var. Lect. The ceremony is
styled: ghrtekambalam, because ghee is poured over the king by the
priest, which being done, the former has to put on a kambele. ~

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 13] =====
11

prognostics of boils, of shoes, of torn garments, of chowries,
of ‘umbrella-sticks, of couches and seats, the examination of
jewels, the foretokens at a lamp, the good or bad signs of
tooth-sticks, eto., such as ocour in common life to every body
as well as to kings,—all these things have every moment to
be considered by an astrologer with undivided attention. And
since the symptoms cannot be observed uninterruptedly by
one man, an astrologer, if well paid, ought to keep in his
service four other persons conversant with the science. One
of them should observe the east and south-east, another the
south and south-west, a third the west and north-west, and
the last of them the north and north-east,—for meteors and
other omina appear suddenly, and produce effects by their
form, colour, glossiness, size, by their touching planets or
stars,

Thus has been said by the great Seer Garga :!

7. “The king who does not honour a scholar accomplished
in horoscopy and astronomy, clever in all branches and scoes-
sories,? comes to grief.

8. Even those who, free from egotism and without any-
thing to care for, lead a hermit’s life in the wilderness, con-
sult the man that knows the motion of the stars.

9. As the night without a light, as the sky without the
sun, 00 is a king without an astrologer; like a blind man he
erreth on the road.

10. If there were no astrologer, the hours, dates, asterisms,
seasons, and half-years, would all be confused.

1 Garga is represented as the astrologer of king Vainya, whose
domestic priest wus the planet Venus, and whose ministers were the
Vilakhilyas. See Mahibh. xil. 59, v. 110 seg., and cf. nete to ch. 1,
v. 8, here before.

* Utpala defines eng and spénge clearly and concisely: WEWQUCT-
श्नीनाभित्व यदुल्ं तान्यङ्खानि । परिगिष्ानयुपाङ्गानीति । Te the
pericishtéai belong, for instance, the purushalekshenem, the reine-
lakshaqam, etc. Garga, as quoted by Utpals, puts it thus: |

अधित्य यह्ादि जतो थेन निखषुः। `

AEWA frargary Tague s

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 14] =====
12

11. Therefore a king should consult a learned and eminent
astrologer if he desire victory, glory, fortune, enjoyments, and _
happi

ppiness.

12. No one who wishes for well-being ehould live in a
country where there is no astrologer, for where he is the
ever-watching and all-foreseeing eye, there no evil will be
found. :

18. No one that has studied astrology can go to the infernal
regions; nay, in the’ divine world of Brahma the divinator
obtains a place.

14. The twice-born, who knows the whole, both text and
interpretation, deserves to be the first in touching food at a
Srédh, and honoured as purifying the company by his pre-
sence.

15. The Greeks, indeed, are foreigners, but with them this
science is in a flourishing state. Hence they are honoured
as though they were Rehis; how much more then a twice-
born man, if he be versed ia astrology.

* The commentator quotes from aa unknown work the following
characteristic stanzas which purpose to explain how it happened that
the astronomical 4gema had been preserved in so great purity amongst

the Greeks:
warsterre मयाय सूर्यः
शास्रं ददौ सखकताय पूर्वम्‌ ।`
बिष्योयेसिषट महर्धिसुख्छो
जानामूतं यत्परमाससाद्‌ ॥
पराश्र्ाप्यधिबम्य सोमाद्‌
जुद्यं सुराशां परमाह्ुतं यत्‌ ।
WATTS HTT
wefdaant यवनेषु तन्ते ॥

‘That in this passage the Sun is represented to be the fountain head
of astronomical science, and in other passages the Creator, is quite
nateral, because the Sun and Brahma (Hirapyagarbha) are identical.
The word खवितु means simply ‘Producer, Creator,’ and GW
Creation,’ and because the creation of the world is only a geaeraliza-
tien of the Sun's rising every morning, WYWA denotes ‘ morning ;’

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 15] =====
13

16. A person who frames predictions, basing them on pre-
tended revelations (from an unseen voice) to his ears, and
scaling (?) (the trustworthiness of) these by entering deosit-
fully statues, eto. (from whence he emits sounds as a would-be
oracle); such a person ought in no case to be consulted: Ae
is no diviner.'

17. A person who without knowing the science exercises
the profession of astrologer, is a wicked man, and s disgrace
to society. Consider him to be a mere star-gazer.

18. Everyone that acts according to the star-gaser’s advice,

from this sevene is derived UTEMfEU, ete. Le. ‘a day reckoned from
sunrise to sunrise, a uatural day.’ In Bactrian also havene is ‘mora-
ing’ Another derivation from ex is GY ‘the produced, i.e. not
original, borrowed light’ therefore the Moon Is called UY, Bectriaa
heome, whereas the producer of light, the enborrowed light, is Ufa,
the Sun. As to Vishgu this also is another name of the Sun. There-
fore the hymn, in Rgyeda x. 90, that is a hymn to the Sun, is called
Purusha-sikta, the hymn to Purusha (alias: Vishgu). Cf. Colebrooke
Mise. Eas. I. p. 26, seg. A parallel to the Parusha-ciikta Is to be found
in Mabdbb. xil. chap. 47; ef. chap. 200, v. 18, and chap. 280, v. 29.

* The scholiast seems to have misunderstood the word WWTTHfa-
For comparison’s sake here may follow the commentary: te
कशिदन््रविगेवं वपत्थघ (". परा ?) के यथेष्टं कथयति।
श्राचकेति प्रसिद्धः॥ अथवा प्र्टारो यचोपविष्टाः श््ितास्वखष्व ओद्म
थिभ विस्व तेषां स कथां परस्यरं क्रियमावामाकर्ेयति। तामाकस्ं
पितुरव्॑ति थथा यद्ेदमभिच्ानं तखदं (भवता) वहब्वमिति ॥ रतुना
WSUS FAT A His explanation of FETA ts thas: FEAR.
ज्जा (ग ० ०४० 48.) प्रखना (२.1. प्रसेना) दिकेन । आवेग देवता-
दिप्रवेशनेन ७५५०४ ७ ००० 18.) पिहितः प्रत्नो भिर्थादिके -म्बन्तर-
.स्थितो -व््मया वाचा सव्भाषते । एतः कहकावेशपिहितिः। 1४ 1५
words do not agree with the singular fUfiga: above. It is doubtfal
whether the reading followed by Utpala, and perhaps by Varths him-
self, be the original one. Garga’s words may have been SYST@-

. ‘Yfaf”R: in which case the rendering would be: “on grounds of
revelations, produced with deceitfal aanenncements.” |. *

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 16] =====
14

which is no better than a farce, goes to the realm of darkness
along with the star-gasing charlatan.

19. A prediction by ignorant men is as uscless as question-
ing s clod of earth at the town-gate; only that which proves
true is held in estimation. ~

20. A person who frames his predictions by good luck, and,
proud of his partial knowledge, delights in disputes! with the
men of ecience, ought to be dismissed by the king.

21. But such a one as properly knows horoscopy, astronomy,
and natural astrology, him ought the king to honour, and his
service he ought to secure, if he be desirous of victory.

22. Not « thousand of elephants, not four times that num-
ber of horses, achieve s0 much as one diviner does, who knows
the right time and the right place.”

28. Evil dreams, evil thoughts, and deeds ill-considered and
badly executed, soon vanish on one’s hearing the harmony
between the moon and the asterisms.?
` 24, Neither the king’s own father, nor his mother, family,

or friends, desire the welfare of him and his army eo much _

as > trustworthy diviner does, who is naturally eager to in-

^ १ पर ०न््व््ण सपृ119 सम्या ज अद्‌ानेन, ४६ ४० ००
and from whom money would be given? Farther be analyses the com-
2००0 तदिषच्छित्र ५०८० तदु ००4 विष्छित्र, "००४०४; तदिति ष्योतिः-
जाखर परामु्तेः but the Jyotihcistram not being’ mentioned in our
passage, the pronoun ted cannot refer to it. The component parts are
‘WfeE and fz, of, as another r. has, fie. The latter means
‘different from,’ the former, ‘cat, held in disrepate,’ the verb flgg
_Deing in some cases synonymous with YT.

° ‘Learning or bearing the harmony between the moon and the |

esteriams,’ means in prose, as Utpala remarks, simply, ‘ being told the
‘data of the month and the asterism (nakshetre) of the day,’ Faferryt
जल, ‘The came idea, ta other words, occurs in our author's Yoge-
‘Yatra, 2, 23, seg. (Ind. Gtadien, x. p. 170).

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 17] =====
ˆ ` 16

0ष्+ ण्ण III.
The Sun's Course.

1 There certainly was a time that the southern progress भ

of the sun began in the middle of Acleshé, and the northern
at the beginning of Dhanishth&; for this is the statement of
ancient works.!
. 2,3. Now-a-days the sun’s southern progress commences
at the beginning of Cancer, and the other at the beginning
of Capricorn. Any deviation from this rule is unnatural,
as may be rendered clear by experimental proofs, either by
observing the sun at rising or setting by means of a mark
placed at & great distance, or by marking the shadows enter-
ing and leaving in a great circle.*

* Cf. Colebrooke, Misc. Ess. ii. 465; 1. 109. Weber, Naxatra,i 311; .
fi, 854, seg. Sir W. Jones, As. Res. ii, 391, seg. ॥

* The term Ww, properly, ‘piercing,’ denotes here, as the popular
expression ‘shooting @ star, the sun,’ does in some European las `
guages, ‘polating at a star to take its height,’ eto; in short, ‘ob-
scrving.’ In this sense By occurs, for instance, in Siddh. Cirom.
p- 16, p. 220, and p. 837, seg. od. BapO Deva. It has been quite exactly
rendered by Sir W. Jones, As. Res. ii. 302. Here is the commentary: °
दूरे तिष्टतीति दुरं । दूर तथिव दूराच । तेव hey
इुरख्छचिहवेषः । †
उद्यकाे ("पयनचलनमनेष्यं | थतो मवरादावादिवः अतिदिगमु-

. करां दिं याति। तथा वकंडवादावाख्ठितः परविदिषं दचिवां दिं
चाति । तेन दूरस्थितं चिद्वादिकमुदये "समये "यवा सवितुखिदं
Wer दितीये «fa Fee atte श्वा पुगरपि विवारः कार्यः किमव
भवलननिवुक्षिजाता भवेति । एवं दिनखक्तकं चावद्ववितागतसद्भा-
जिकालात्माक्‌ पञाचावेषं कि

` जाता किमादौ किं पञ्चादेति। (४० भणत 19 071८668 ७७ ००६ ००० ६४
all MSS. ; they are interpolated, as appears from ft, which is out of”
place. On the observation of the equinoctial shadow Utpela dilates
considerably ; here is a part of his commentary: Watt

बुहदृत्तमुत्पाव
दिकं ला तथे अहं केत mew भिङुवरिे.पू्ोरथा-

Digitized Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 18] =====
16

4. If the sun returns without having reached Capricorn,
he brings ruin to the western and southern countries; if he
goes back without having reached Cancer, then he destroys
the north and the east.! :

5. By returning after passing the winter solstitial point,
he brings safety and growth of corn; ho follows then the
nataral law. It is when he takes an unnatural course that
* he causes danger. ,

6. When the being named Tvashty® obecures the sun’s orb,
it not being the period of an eclipse, he destroys seven sove-
reigns and their people through war, fire, and famine.

7. There are thirty-three Ketus, sons of Rahu, called
TAmasaktlakas (i.¢. ‘opacous wedges’). When these are seen
on the sun, one must foretell the consequences from their
- colour, place, and figure.

खमथयोः प्राश्चपरारेखाचां तस्व शद्भोग््टाया पतति । ततो यचा-
चथारको मिषुनं थावद्याति तथातथाकोदयकाले काया fete aft
आच्वपरारेखायाः। अस्वमये "धवं । ततः कर्कटादौ स्वति "कँ प्रतिदिनं
“WATT याति यावत्वन्यानं । द ०; ४१८०, १४०० ४४० ६००० ०। ४०
भमः अयननिवुत्तावासत्रायां तस्िष्डजे चसितररेओे पूवा
काया प्रविशति तच fey ard wears निर्गच्छति तत्रापि fe.
कार्थं । 1४०५ ०७० on the second चम) ; कतचिद्रयोर्यदि साम्यमुत्पन्न
लडा तदिभ -यननियुत्तिरेव । त्तं चातायां विचारयेत्‌ किमयन- .
जिबु्तिः करलामतसद्काण्तिकालतुखा किमादौ किं पञ्ादेति॥
* It ie unnecessary to point ont all the passages where our author

Fepresents physical impossibilities, नु as portentous (विषति),
still as possible. He mentions these out of reverence for the seers of .
yore, or, as Utpala pats it, WANTSITYETTY: Cl. chap, 9, v. 7.
* It may be doubted whether the author exactly knew what the ancleat
authorities meant with WE. Paricara, as quoted by Utpala, says: *
अपवंयि शथाद्ुकी लटा गाम महायहः ।
आवुद्योति तमःामः स्वेलोकनिप्तथे ॥
Apparently, it is another name for Rabu, but Vartha-mihira must have
thought otherwise, for eclipses—possible and impossible ones—are
treated ia chap. 5,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 19] =====
17

8. They are baleful if they appear on the sun’s orb, but
propitious if they appear on that of the moon; yet they are
bad even on the latter, if they bear resemblance to crows,
headless trunks, and weapons. ^

9, 10. The symptoms of their being about to appear are:
turbid water, a sky covered with dust, a violent wind shatter-
ing the tops of hills and trees and accompanied with grit,
trees having an appearance as if the seasons were changed,
wild beasts and birds vexed,! a glowing sun. There are,
then, also other uncommon phenomena, as whirlwinds, earth-
quakes, and others. -

11. These phenomena exercise no peculiar influence if
comets, the Tamasaktlakas or Rahu, are seen: one has only
to tell the influence of the latter, because these are the cause
of the former (vis., turbid water, eto.) appearing.

12, In every country where they are seen on tho sun’s
disc, one may be sure that calamity befalls the king.

18. Then even holy men, attenuated with hunger, forsake
duty and good behaviour, and get, with starved children
their hands, painfully to foreign countries. ^
. 14. The honest citizens are plundered of their wealth by
robbers; their bodies are weakened, their eyelids swollen `
from incessant sobbing, and their eyes filled with tears of
sorrow.* ,

15. Other people, starved, indignant at what they suffer at
the hands of their own king and of foreign armies, give
vent to their feelings in talking of the conduot of their king
and the doings of the enemy. -

* ¢Vexed, EH or WETH, ls an augural term. The vexation may
be of different kinds, First and chiefly, animals are said to be ‘vexed’
when they are Gurferqafeqent:. Further, when they emit boarse
sounds (WEYCRT:). For other kinds of vexation, see ch. 86, 15.

* In the text r. WTeY for WTeq, and in v. 8, WARE for WANT.

* एष, पुराहतम्‌, ०० 119 ००७; सन्ये पर । एवं प्रबुवन्ति
कंवयन्ति (०० "४० ००००५५०) चथा चत्वमोख्ाभिरणुमूृयते तत्पुरा
पूवं खचरितमाद्मनार्थितं । गुपतिचरितं राचा चा । अर्थितमिति ॥

It being a matter of course for Hinds, thet qredrapgu® is ya
2

Digitized by Google ।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 20] =====
18

16. The clouds, although they were in successful condition
at the time of their becoming pregnant, give but little rain
at the time of birth. The rivers get shallow ; corn grows at
but a few places. .

17, If a staff in the sun is soon, the sovereign will die;
if something in the shape of a headless trunk, there will be
danger from sickness ; if something like a crow, danger from

" pobbers; if it be a peg there will be famine.

18. The sun: being marked with things in the shape of
royal emblems, like umbrellas, banners, chowries, eto., causes
ॐ change in Government; if covered with sparks, amoke,
eto., he destroys the people.

19. One of such figures brings famine; two or more tend
to the ruin of the king. According as the colour of the
figures whereby the sun is covered is white, red, yellow, or
black, he hurts the castes severally.?

20. The danger approaches mankind from the same side
as where these great portents show themselves first on the
eun’s diso,

21. When the great luminary, with beams turned ण्‌
wards, is red, it destroys the commander-in-chief; when
yellow, the king’s son; and when white, his priest.

22. Variegated, or smoke-coloured raya, cause the land to

Wet, it would be unbefitting to mention this as something quite extra-
ordinary. Moreover, the symmetry between the former and latter half
stanza necessarily requires YT. As to the meaning of WW, cf.
Decakumira, p. 94, 1. 1 (ed. Wilson),

* The Gerbhas are the fancied fetuses of the clouds, conceived in a
certain period of the year, and born 195 days after the time of cosicep-
tom. See chap, 31. ~ `

* The method after which predictions are framed is simple enough.
Since the staff, the sceptre, is a token of royalty, the appearance of it
Sorebodes good or evil, according to circumstances, to the king. A crow,
being known as thievish, points to theft. ‘A peg is a moans of shutting,
and therefore denotes the closure of granaries,

* White ts the colour of the Brahmans, red of the Kshatriyas, yellow
of the Vaicyas, and black of the Pidras,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 21] =====
19
be disturbed by robbers and battles, unless it rain very

soon.

28, 24. The sun is auspicious, when copper red, or russet,
in the dewy season; yellow, saffron-hued in spring; pale,
gold-coloured in summer; white during*the rains; tinged
like the calice of the rosy water-lily in autumn; blood-red

- in winter. At the commencement of the rains he may show
whatever colour he uses to show at any other season, and
will, nevertheless, bring good luck, provided he be glossy.

25. A rugged sun is pernicious to Brahmans, if white; to
Kshatriyas, if blood-red; to Vaicyas, if yellow; and to
Gadras, if black; on the contrary, a smooth sun bestows
good upon the same.

26. In summer a red sun brings danger; a dark one in
the rains causes drought; a yellow one in winter produces
ere long dangerous diseases.

27. If the sun’s orb is crossed by the figure of the rain-
bow, he produces quarrels between the monarchs. A bright,
shining sun at the time of the rains setting in, brings rain in
the course of the same day.

28. In the rainy season he gives rain the same day, if
tinged like a Sirisa flower. If he has the dye of a peacock’s -
feather, it will not rain during twelve years.

29, They assert that there will be danger from insects if
the sun be gray, and from a foreign army if he appears ashy.
Buin to that sovereign in whose asterism the sun, while
having a flaw, is standing? .

30. If the sun at mid-heaven has the appearance of hare-
blood, there will be battles; if he resembles the moon, the
King is about to be killed and a foreigner to reign.

31. A pot-like sun occasions famine and pestilence; a
fragmentary one destroys the king; one without beams is
terrifying; one resembling a gateway ruins the town; one
appearing as if it were an umbrella, tends to the loss of the
country.

* The asterism, lunar mansion, of a sovereign is the asterism under
which his country stands according to the division of the globe, os
taught In chap, 14, ~

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 22] =====
5

32. Whenever the sun resembles » banner or a bow, is
trembling and rough, battles are at hand. A black line on
the luminary shows that = royal councillor will kill the
king. `

83. When s meteor, a thunderbolt, or lightning,’ hurts
the Day-god st rising, then you may hold that the king

. shall die, and a foreign ruler be invested with government.

34, A oun that day for day, or at dawn and evening
twilight is surrounded by « halo, or sots and rises blood-red,
brings about a change of rulers.

35. When the sun at both twilights is covered with clouds
that resemble weapons, he causes battles ; when they resemble
deer, buffaloes, birds, asses, and camels, he brings danger.

36. An asterism suffers greatly when it is scorched by the
ean’s rays; but afterwards it becomes purified thereby, as
gold is by the heat of fire, : ,

87. A mock-sun, when standing north of the sun; gives
rain; when eouth, wind; when at both sides, there is danger
of inundation ; when it is seen above, it is pernicious to the
sovereign ; when below, to the people. . .

38, 39. The sun in the sky looking red like blood, or
having his diso reddened by coarse dust, brings death to the
king before long; being blackish, spotted dark, or accom-
panied at morn and eve with the dreadful and hoarse shrieks
of birds and wild beasts, he is deadly to the people.*

40, The Day-god bestows bliss upon mankind when his
surface is spotless, his orb not crooked, his beams are dis-
tinct, large, bright, and long; in short, when he has his
nataral balk, colour, and signs. °

* A definition of ulké, esent, and oidyut may be found chap. 83,
verse 1, seg. 7

* Verve 38 and 20 of the taxt form ove stanza in the metre Narkufaka,
CL ch. 108, 53; Colebrooke, Mise. Essays, il. pp. 148, 103; Weber,
Ind. Stedien, vill. p. 306.

ee

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 23] =====
Temas Siena GT रः

9

0ष+शः 1४.
The Moon’e Course.

1. One-half of the moon, whése orbit lies between the sun
and the earth, is always made bright by the sun’s rays; the
other half is made dark by her own shadow, like tho two
aides of a pot standing in the sunshine.

2. The solar rays being reflected on the moon that is of
& watery nature, dispel the nightly dark, as rays falling
upon a mirror (placed at the door of a room) dispel the
darkness in the room.

8. As the brightness attaches itself to the moon, on her
going forth from below the sun, from the west side, so she
rises brighter and brighter in proportion as she is going
farther onward from below the sun.

4. Thus the. brightness of the moon increases from day.
to day, in proportion to the difference of her position in
respect to the sun, in the same manner as the shine on the `
west side of a pot in the afternoon.

5. The moon, when taking her course south of the aster-
isms Jyeshth4, Mila, and both Ash&dhis, destroys seeds, `
aquatic animals, and forests, and causes danger of fires.

6. She is evil when going south of Vigdkh& and Anura-
dh ; but auspicious when going through Maghé or Vicékha.

7. There are six asterisms with which the moon enters
into (actual) conjunction before (theoretically) reaching
them—viz., Revat!, and the five following: Acvint, Bharapt,
Krttika, Rohipt, and Mygaciras. There are twelve, the con-
junction with which takes place when the moon is (actually)
in them—vis., ArdrA, and the eleven following: Punarvasu,
Tishya, Aglesh&, Maghé, Parva and Uttara-Phalgunt,
Hasta, Citra, Sviti, Victkhé, and Anuridh’. With the

* Utpala explains after: with Sarrerr: WMEFwAT: 5 this passage
Proves that be ie right. In this acceptation the word occurs often
enough, indeed, but the Hinds commentators have commenty misunder- .
stood it.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 24] =====
22

remaining nine the moon enters into conjunction (actually),
when she has (theoretically) passed them—vis., JyeshthA,
Mis, Parva and Uttara-Ashidhé, Cravane, Dhanishthé,
Qatabhishaj, Parva and Uttara-Bhadrapada.!

8. (The different forms of the moon bear some resemblance
to certain figures). She is said to have the shape of a boat,
when she is broad and has one cusp somewhat erected.
Boatsmen suffer by it, but all other people will be happy.

9. They call it “the plough,” when one cusp is half
erected. Ploughmen suffer by it, but there is abundance of
food, and friendship reigns between the monarchs, even
more than can be accounted for.

10. When the southern horn is half erected, then the
figure is named “the mischievous plough.” It causes the
death of the King of Pandya, and occasions warlike pre-
parations.

11. Both cusps of the moon happening to bo “equal,”

there will be plenty, safety, and rain, as much as in the first
days. If the moon rises like “a staff,” the cows will suffer,
and the king rule despoticall:
_ 12. A moon in the shape of “a bow,” produces battles,
and victory will be theirs whose country lies in the direction
of the string. The position of the moon in which she is
stretched out from south to north, is styled “the yoke,” and
Oocasions earthquakes.

13. The yoke may be slightly turned up at the southern
cusp; then the moon is said to be “lying on the side;” this

4 The statement contained in this verse is one of those which our
author found in the ancient standard works, and repeated out of piety
for the Rehis. The commentator quotes ene of those seers, Garga, from
whose words we msy gather that in his time (i.¢. in the time of the
author of the werk ascribed to the mythical Garga) the Nakshatras had
not all of them the same extension. Cf. Weber, Naxatra I. p. 309, seg.,
where the passage frem Garga is to be found. ‘The remark of Utpala,
cited by Weber, Le., after a very corrupt MB., runs thas: WATYTaT-
wrentererret ferrite | wet 1 weitere

whewity Quaiyyeararguifa:

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 25] =====
23
ruins the chiefs of trading companies, and hinders the fall of

rain,

14, If one horn of the moon is turned down, so as to be
lower than the upper edge of the crescent, they term it
“the inclined” position. It makes food scarce, both for
men and for black cattle.

15. The moon shows an entirely uninterrupted curved
line in the shape of “ the basin.” ' At this occurrence princes
that govern a province lose their placo.

16. The moon—apart from the forementioned positions,
being erected at the north side, causes the growth of corn
and rain. When turned up north, she is declared to be
threatening with dearth.*

17. Anybody beholding the moon with one cusp vanished,
or turned down, or without cusps, or the new moon full,
* loses his life.?

18. The rules concerning the different figures of the moon
having been told, now her various sizes follow. . A amall moon
is said to produce famine, but a big one to bring abundance.

1 The reading of the printed text and of the comm. WENT@H is
agalnst grammar. Not the curved line (being the subject im the
sentence) is called HU, but the figare. Therefore, the tree r. le

, as exhibited in most MSS, ,

* प्र ४९० ‰००४००७ (द्वं) ० 88० (संङ्ान्‌) ०१ ६6 22009 जकर क्था |
known to Varihs-mibira as wanting a scientific base. The motive that
led him and other scientific Hindu astronomers to attend to such matters

_ be well explained by Utpala: ferdarerey Saqunt | WHrea ।
चानि (५७. संख्ानानि) गोत्पथन्ते परिजेखविधौ ताग्बुत्यातस्पाि
कट्‌ाचिदु्ने। अतसतेषां मगवद्र्ादिविरवितथ्ाखषु फलानि yaa
तानिचाचर्चेय पूर्व्ाखागुखारेयो्नानीति॥ ` ;
' * The comm. follows another r. (see VV. RR.), and divides the sca-
४००० > पऽ गा ; चकेन गुद्धेदोपलवितम्‌-विलीनं मचितमिविकेव
गुदेव-अयादयुदमधोमुखं गुदं वाखछ भवति-सथा अमूम्‌ ह, ख.

This cannot be right, because जगद, 2०4 being an adjective, cannot
be an attribute to UME; yet it ought to be, because the following
Wawa is such an attribute. . „ ना ‘

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 26] =====
19. Being of a moderato bulk—known under the name of -

“thunderbolt ”’—ahe threatens with famine and excites tur-
moils among sovereigns. A moon like a drum brings safety
and plenty of food.

20. One may hold that a moon of very large bulk tends to
increase the happiness of kings; that a big one causes abun-
dance, and a small one dearth.

21. The moon, when one of her horns is touched by Mars,
destroys the savages of the borders, and low princes; when
touched by Saturn, she causes danger from war and famine;
. When by Mercury, drought and dearth; touched by Jupiter,
she destroys the chiefest kings; by Venus, the lesser ones.
The influence of these planets is trifling in the light half of
the month; but in the dark half it shows itself in the
manner aforesaid.

22. The moon being crossed by Venus, hurts, during
seven months, the Magadhas, Yavanas, Pulindas, Nepalese,
Bhyngis,! Marukuccas,* Surashtrians, Pancilas, Kekayas,
Kulitas, Cannibals,? and Usinaras.

23, When transversed by Jupiter, the moon ‘will afflict, ~

during ten months, the Gandharians, Suviras, Sindhians,
Kiras, the grains, the mountains, the Dravida-kings and
° Brahmans.

24. At the occurrence of a transit of Mars, during a
period of six months, the moon will destroy those kings that
are prepared for war, along with their chariots, horse, and
elephants; aleo the Trigartians, MAlavas, Kulindas; the

* This word is very doubtfal; see VV. RR.

* Instead of SWWEE, as exhibited in the prifted text, we oaght to

¥. WERT, as one codex of the comm. actually has. It is one word,”

aleo, according to Utpala’s comment. The Marukuccas, or Merukuccas,
were a people in the modern Kaferistan, or thereabouts; cf. ch. 14,
v.23, As to HUG, this would be grammatically correct, and mean

* Marwar and Kach ;’ yet, wherever it Is intended to be one word, it 15 `

nothing but a very frequent clerical error.

® The cannibals being always placed in the far East must denote either
the ishabitants of the Andamans and Nicebars, or the cannibal tribes
of the Indian Archipelago, or both.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 27] =====
25

foremen of corporations; the Cibis, the princes of Oudh, the
rulers of the Kurus, Matsyas, and Cuktis, and most eminent
Kshatriyas.

25. When the moon's orb is*crossed by Saturn, she will,
during ten months, strike with grief the Yauddheyss, royal
councillors, Kurus, the chieftains of the eastern countries,
and the Arjundyanas,

26. By going across the moon, Mercury will oppress
Behar, Mathura, and the banks of the Vena, but every:
where elee the Golden Age, 80 to say, is come back.

27. The moon on being transversed by a comet destroys
safety, health, and abundance, undoes the men of arms by
profession, and causes distress by the prevalence of thieves.’

28. When the moon is touched by a meteor during an
eclipse, then the king in whose birth-star she stood* shall
be stricken.

29. An ashy, rugged, reddish moon, deprived of beams, or
one that is gray, split, and trembling, occasions danger of .
famine, war, sickneés, and robbery.

80. A moon appearing white as hoar frost, jessamine,

1 In order to show in what manner Vartha-mihira made use of his
authorities, the following passage of Parfcara’s, being s counterpart to
v. 21-27, is given as a specimen: AUT UCTYT: |
अथ भदेष्वसुरगदमिद्रः पा (*1. प) धालम (१1. मा) बधमद्भ (*. घु) -
कुणिन्द कोलूतककेवययवनधूषराग्बषमार्गया (*1. रा) इनाराष्यवुद्धि-
मदकुच्चौशीगरपजिन्दपुदषादनेपालान्‌ सप्त माखागुपतापयति। चमर्‌
OAT दथ मासान्‌ याग्धारवासातिचिन्धुबाखीकपार्वतकाष्मोरान्‌ ।
वितिमुतमि्रः वबुदधिषिमाखवषिगर्तकृशिन्दायोध्याधिपतोचच चा-
यिभिः खट षयमासागुपतापयतोति । अरदंसूनुसभदे नुपविरोधामा-
ह्यमेदा गणपयौधेयाञेभायनभयानावुष्टिपरादुभवद्य दश्च मासान्‌ ॥.
जनित्र: सुभिपपेमवुष्टिकरः । केतोखद्विपययः। प्रवरधमानो बपुष्मा-
नपराधिगहमित्रो PT SETAC (MSS. STAT and gaa)
wafer a

® One’s birth-star is the asterism the moon is standing ia at the
time of one’s birth.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 28] =====
14५ WS. WAS f-
26 = 4/5

the white water-lily, or crystal, and looking as if she had
been carefully polished bright by Gaurt, because she knows
that at night it will be an ornament on the head of her
beloved Civa; such a moon will bring happiness to mankind.

81. Ifthe moon, white like the fibres of the nymphwa or
pearls, regularly wanes or increases, and shows nothing un-
natural in her motion, disc, rays, or conjunctions, she fore-
bodes the heroes’ triumph.

32. By the moon duly increasing in the bright half of the
month, the nobility obtain elevation and the people thrive.
If the moon wane during that period, all classes of the
population decline; if she remain stationary, the condition
of the country remains stationary aleo. In the dark half of
the month the consequences of the aforesaid circumstances
are quite the reverse. ~

Cnapree V.
Réhu's Course.

1, Some say that Rahu is, forsooth, a demon’s head,
which, albeit severed from the trunk, yet, by virtue of
having tasted of nectar, has continued alive and become a
Graha (i.¢. ‘seizer,’ or ‘ planet’).

2. Having the same shape as the orb of the gun and moon,
and being dark, he cannot, forsooth, be seen in the aky except
at the period of the nodes, whan he appears in consequenve
of the boon granted to him by the Creator.!

3. Others declare R&hu to have a body, consisting only of
head and tail, the figure of a snake. Others again tell us
that the so-called son of Sinhikd is uncorporeal and opacous !
. 4. Now, if Bahu, having a round form, were a corporeal
being moving through the signs of the sodiao, or if he were

१ @ 40002. 1, ©. 19, The nectar, amets or soma, which the Devas
and Rabu drink, é.¢. with which they plenish and replenish themselves,
Is the light they borrow from the ०४०.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 29] =====
a7

a head, how then could he “ ” at a distance of half the
zodiac, and his motion be subject to a rigid rule P

5. And if his motion were not subject to a fixed rule, how
could it be found by calculation? As to the Réhu known
under the name of “ Mouth and Tail,” by what reason does
not he “seize” at an intermediate distance?!

6, And now, the Réhu who has the shape of a huge anake
must “seize” with his tail or with his mouth; how, then, is
it that the part of his body between the mouth and tail does
not cover the half of the zodiac P

7. If there were a couple of Rahus, then, at the occurrence
of an eclipse of the moon at her setting or rising, the sun too
would be eclipsed by the second Rhu, which is at six signs
from the former.®

8. (The true explanation of the phenomenon is this): In
an eclipse of the moon, she enters the earth’s shadow; ina
colar eclipse, the sun’s. Hence the commencement of a lunar
eclipse does not take place from the west side, nor that of a
eolar eclipse from the east.

9. In like manner as the shadow of a treo falls on one side
and stretches far, s0 does every night the earth’s shadow by -
its concealing the sun’s light (from the moon).

10. When the moon stands in the seventh sign from the
san, and not too much to the south or to the north,® then,.on
tending onwards, she enters the terrestrial shadow.

* That is, at the distance of five, four, or threo signs.

* 0०". अद राडद््यमण्यस्स्विति । तवेको नियतचवारो finite
"प्नियतथारः । ख षडाश्न्तरितो -व॑चद्धयोरयहशं वरोतीवेतत्मति-
वेघार्थमाह । राङदयमिन्यादि ॥ एतदुक्नं safe | wer wees
ख्देति यस्तो वाख्ठमेति । तदा पूथापरदरिणासहशेन्डोरकंद्ञापि
पूषोपरचितिवाखक्तिर्मवति । षदाश्चनरितलवादुपपदते । द्वावपि इरि `
वादुपरिख्वितौ इष्लौ मवतः पवैकालस्ड च स्मवारेकेवानियतवारेख
अद्रन्ख्छादति "परेव नियतचारेख ददुाश्यन्तरितेन ददुाान्रिवः
शूं रति ॥

* ‘That Is, if che has the same latitude, or nearly se.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 30] =====
28

11. The moon moving in a lower sphere reaches like a
cloud the sun from the west. Hence a solar eclipse hasa
different appearance at different places according to the point
of view.

12. That which covers the moon is larger than herself;
hence her cusps form obtuse angles when she is half obecured.
As, on the contrary, the body obscuring the sun is smaller
than the latter, the-horns of the sun form acute angles.

13. This is the cause of an eclipse, as set forth by masters
of heavenly wisdom; the scientific trath may be expressed in
these words: ‘“ Rahu has nothing to do with it.”

14. As to that demon Réhu, the Creator granted him the
boon, that, at the period of an eclipse, he should feed upon a
Portion of the offerings to the gods.

15. Since at that time he is present, “Raha” has become
& figurative way of speaking. The northern or southern -
motion of the moon! is in mathematical astronomy also figu-
ratively called “ Rahu.”

16. The occurrence of an eclipse cannot by any means be
known from forebodings, as theese appear at other times too,
nor (if they be seen before an eclipse) are they to be considered
as portents.

17. From the conjunction of five planets, to be sure, no
eclipse can arise, Nor should the learned pay any attention
to (the old method for finding out the direction in which the
eclipse shall commence, by pouring) oil in water on the

* In other words, ‘the moon's mode,’ WEEUTA. 0०८०. शश्चियति-
trafrwar दचिणो्तरा विषेपवश्यात्‌ ख चवियेप उत्पद्यते पातवशात्‌।
(Cl Bhryo-8. 3, 6) यतञ्द्धपात एव लोके राडरिति प्रसिद्धिः। मौमा-
हौं ताराहाणामपि पाता विषमे तेषामपि तदश्चादिकेपो भवति।
तिन चाम्योत्तरा बतिच्चायते । किमयं पहः कराभधयादुत्तरेथ विचिप्ः

"किंवा दवयेन । wl ware चासौ efter अतिः पातवधात्षि-
waft धिवापि लोके राडर्थेनोपचर्यते। - एतदुक्तं मवति। चद्धविषेपच्ा-
जार्ध यशक्रपातः परिकख्मितः स एव लोके राङरिषुष्यत इति॥ ०८
Gtrye-S, 1, 68, cog. Siddh. Cirom. Gaplt. Madbyamédby, v. 21.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 31] =====
29

eighth of the half-month (in order to see in what direction
the oil moves).

18, The observation on the sun has to be derived from the
parallax in latitude; the direction from the parallax in lati-
tade and the variation of the eoliptio (alias, deflection) ; the
moment to reckon from is the end of the lunar day. This
has been treated by me in my work on mathematical astro-
nomy.

19. Seven deities, vis., the Creator, the Moon, Indra, Ku-

* Utpala quotes a verse from Vrddha-Garga (v. 1. Garga):
प्हप्कसंयोगं दष्टा न पहणं वरेत्‌ ।
चदि न ष्ठादुध रुधा पहं वदेत्‌ ॥
एष्य, ०४५०० एतद्सत्‌ ॥ अापि दिकपरिच्ाना्थमाह तवथ
खले ० शआ० । गहणं यदा भविता तदाष्टम्यां तिषौ वलमच्ये तख चित्तं
चब्दां दिधि भ प्रसरति तस्यामेव ययं वहनं । तवा युद्येः (1. च
अर्वः) । ॥
अष्टम्यां परिवेदः स्वाभीले weak wet!
प्रसारित विवानीयायतः खष्डखतसखम इधितदप्यसत्‌ ॥
® For the whole process ef. Sirya-S. 4 and 5; Siddh. Cirom. Graha-
pavis. v.11, o¢7—Utpala त्था, ६० अवनति ०७० स्फुटविचेप, % ५७
corrected latitude is, in fact, the latitude applied with the parallax in
latitude, ० ०५»; अवनतिरिति सुफ़टविषेपख्व नाम । यदुम्‌

अवमतिवरभ बहयाद्रवीम्दुपरिमाणयोगदववनात्‌ ।
लग्यूलाचु दिगुखाक्िधिमुक्तिवदादिधेत्काजम्‌ ॥

ie. “subtract the square of the corrected Intitude from the square of half
the sum of the measures of sun and moon; multiply the square root of
the remainder by two; from this predict the moment of obscuration, in
the same way as you find the date in lunar time (4¢. multiply by 60 and_
divide by the difference of the daily motions of sun and moon)” This
verse is taken from Variha-mihira’s Pancasiddbintika, the very work
referred to in the text. The 0०००. 7१०००२5 ? एवमवनल्वा स्फुटविचेपे-
दाव यासो भवति सर्वग्रहणं दण्डयहणमिव्यादि ॥ To qe,
ॐ 20 ९0007800 नि ० कत 1 च्छन्‌ › ४ ०00 कणा an explanatory
तात्काणोत्पन्ना , See Bapd Deva in Transl, of Siddh. Clrom. p. 164, ang.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 32] =====
80

bera, Varuna, Agni, and Yama, have to be regarded as rulers,
in regular succession, of the periods of eclipses, each for six
months (from creation downward).

20. In the period presided over by the Creator, Brahmans
and cattle thrive, safety and well-being reign, and the grain
crops flourish, This likewise happens in the period ruled by
the Moon; but there is want of rain in it, and suffering
amongst scholars. .

21. In the period of Indra, one may expect discord be-
tween sovereigns, loss of the autumnal corn, and want of
eafety. In the period of Kubera, great merchants lose their
wealth, but else there is abundance,

22. The epoch of Varuna is unlucky to kings, but produces
security to others, and good crops. That of Agni, which is
also named after Mitra, gives grain, health, safety, and rain.

28. That of Yama causes drought, dearth, and loss of the
crops. Any other period of eclipses! is unlucky, and brings
famine, pestilence, and drought.

24. When an eclipse takes place before the (calculated)

moment of contact, the fetuses of the clouds miscarry and ~~

war will rage; when after the just moment, flowers and fruits
will be lost, and there is unsafoty and a failure of crops.

ˆ 26. These effects of such eclipses as take place too early or
too late I have mentioned because I have found this in
ancient works; for one who knows mathematical astronomy,
there can be no question of an eclipse occurring at 8 wrong
time. "

26. If an eclipse of the sun and of the moon should happen
to occur both in the earte month, then monarchs’ perish by
the troubles in their own armies, and war rages violently.

5 That is to say, an eclipse at any other period but that of six months,
०५०. एतदहं मवति । षयमासोक्षरवुदा पधा उक्ञाः। तच कदा-
चिदुत्पातवध्रात्‌() प्मिर्मातैः सर्पिः पथमिवा षडमिः सभिः यप्तमिवा
पं भवति । तद्‌ा तत्प ब्रह्मादि न भवति तच चुारावुशिदम्‌ ॥ A
quetation from Garga— दि ™ ॥

अक्र पञ्चममाखे तु मासे लेकादभे तथा ।
weed wr ate wee gaara wah

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 33] =====
81

27. The sun and moon, eclipsed at rising or setting, are
pernicious to the autumnal corn and to kings; when wholly
obscured and seen hy evil planets (vis., Mars and Saturn),
they bring famine and pestilence.

28. The sun, being obscured when half risen on the horizon,
destroys the populace and all kinds of sacrifices ; when in the
first division of heavens,' he ruins those who in their pro-
fession make use of fire,* men excelling in virtue, priests, and
ascetics.

. 29, The same being eclipsed in the second division, strikes
the husbandmen, heretics, merchants, Kshatriyas, and com-

manders of armies; in the third, the artisans, Cidras, fo-

reigners, and royal councillors.

80, 31. Obsoured on mid-day, the sun is fatal to sovereigns
and the middle-country, but the grain will fetch fair prices;
’ in the fifth division of heavens, he damages grass-eating
animals, ministers, women, and Vaicyas; in the sixth divi-
sion, women and (idras; at the time of setting, the robbers
and savage tribes of the borders. When an eclipse ends in
that part of the heavens to which those indicated here before
belong, then happiness awaits them. .

82. Rahu appearing when the sun is in its northern pro-
gress, ruins the Brahmins and princes; when the sun is in the
southern progress, the Vaicyas and (fidras, The same when

1 The heaven, and also the day, are for the purpose divided into six
parts. Yet the Scholiast says, ‘into seven parts.’ UIQifEUnATeel
सप्तमिभागमपदत्व यञ्लम्बगे तत्प्रमा । अनेनाकाश्ममपि बक्तणाषछतं
भवति । तथाच

स्यार्धिकं मौदिकान्वं कालं सप्तनुशं हरेत्‌ ।
दिणमागेन यग ांधमानं युगस्य तत्‌ ॥
wa wer विचारयेत्‌ कल्ित्राका्यमाने प्ररहयं ATT ना ॥

* The Scholiast explains the गण्य सगन्युपवी विन्‌ and synonyms, both
here and at other passages, by ‘ goldsmiths, blacksmiths,’ ete. qyy-
कारपरमृतथः «2» 2८› सुवंवारणोहकारावस्ारपमूतथः

* ००००, प्रह्वता बङ्धरवाचिनः ` ~

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 34] =====
8४

even in the north, the east, and s0 on, destroys the Brahmans,
the Kshatriyas, and the rest, in succession.'

83. By standing in an intermediate direction he strikes the
barbarians, kings who have taken the field, and the keepers
of sacrificial fires. In the south, he is deadly to aquatic
animals and elephants; in the north, to cows.”

34. When the demon comes up from the east, he makes
the earth replete with water; whem from the west, he is
declared to be pernicious to farmers, servants, and seeds.

35. At an eclipse (of the sun or moon whilst standing) in
Aries, the Pancilas, Kalingas, (frasenas, Kambojas, Orissees,
Kiritas, men who follow the profession of arms and smiths
come to grief.

36, 37. When the sun or moon is obecured in Taurus, cow-
herds, cattle and its breeders, as well as persons who have
risen to eminence, come to grief; so do noble ladies, kings,
king-like men,* persons endowed with strength and with
artistio talents, the people dwelling on the banks of the
Jamna, the Bahltkas, Matsyas, and Suhmas, when the eclipse
occurs in Gemini. `

38. 42 9०179 in Cancer causes suffering to the Abhiras,
Qabaras, Pahlavas, Mallas,? Matsyas, Kurus, Scythians, Pan-
cAlas, and maimed persons, and ruins the corn too.

* The author and Utpala were perfectly well aware that many state-
ments of the ancient astrologers have no foundation whatever in obser-
vation. The remarks of the commentator to this verse are curious—
अन्वव यदुह ख्द्मादिदृष्टो राङर्विप्रादीतरिहन्तितदु्रदचिखरिग्भा-
जात्कदाचिदपि रविश्श्रिनोः प्रप्रहयमोषौ ग मवतस्तत्विमिलयुह्नम्‌ ।
Urge बदितगोजविदद्मिति। अचोच्यते। पूर्वधाख्रेषु भगवत्परा-
जअरमर्गादिविरचितेषु इृष्ते तखौत्पातिकं पवाधिठवयोकठं फलमेतत्‌ ।
age 1 aera प्रतिच्चैयम्‌ ष्यो-
frwarrrret fnfradt 4 Wrarerd खयमेव विकलायितुं
किमु बहनां मतं वच्छे. (See Bch. 8५०४. ch. 9, v. 7, where this pro-
gram, NAT, of Varthe-milira is found),

* Comm. YATE YTTENT:, to which im some MSS. is added
अमाव्यायाः

* ० 8०४०१७०6 ४४७१ सङ्घान्‌ bere as an appellative nous, QISYW:
WIM ‘ boxers.’

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 35] =====
33

39, 40. One in Leo destroys the Pulinds-hordes, the Me-
kalas, courageous men, peers of kings, monarchs, and the
inhabitants of the woods; one in Virgo, the grains, poets,
writers, singers, the countries of Acgmaka and Tripura, and
the rice fields; one in Libra, the Avantis, the people of the
western border land, honest men, merchants, the Dagirnas
and inhabitants of the province of Bhroach; one in Scorpio,
the Udumbaras, Madras, Colas, the trees, Yaudheyas, and
such as fight with poison.'

41. An eclipse in Sagittarius is mortal to chief ministers,
horses, the Videhas, boxers, the Pancilas, physicians, mer-
chants, cruel persons, and military men from profession ; in
Capricorn, to fishes,? ministers’ families, the populace, to per-
eons skilful in spells and herbs, to aged men, and soldiers.

42. An eclipse in Amphora will strike the natives of An-
targiri‘ and of Western India, the porters, robbers, Abhiras,

' The expression विषायुधीया is somewhat ambiguous. According
to ५,८ 8००५६ ४ + विषमायुधं येषाम्‌. It must denote, in the widest .
sense, all living beings that make use of poison in self-defence, like the
scorpion, for the system of astrology requires a connexion between
Scorpio, in which the eclipse occurs, and the sufferers by it.

* Or, ‘the Mallas;’ may be the expression applies both to these and
to boxers,

* © To fishes,’ because the Makara Is an aquatic animal.

* The different copies of the Comm. have been so meddled with that
it is well-nigh impossible to make out what reading Is the one preferred
by Utpala himself, Thus much is certain, that some copies have, or
should have Wanfafcarrafas, others wafafcaraufige. One
28.15 अन्तर्गिरि भिरेरकरे जाताक्लमानिलर्थः। Another, however,
अन्तर्मे बिरौ पर्वते बाता अन्तर्गिरिजास्तान्पवेतमध्ये जातान्‌ । तां
wufige, yet this latter copy contains the following words, which would
have been expected in the former copy, where they are just wanting:
धिचिदनार्गिरिजाग्सपञश्चिमवनानिति पठन्ति । भिरेरग्तरोबान्‌ वनां
खना () प्राकपाठो °च शोभनः ॥ वर ककयाच्० ला is trifling, but
the quoted passage may show how the MSS. have been altered. I am
not able to say which part of the Himilayan hill-country was called
Antargiri; it may be Kumaon, or a still more eastern district. Cf. ch.

xvi. 2, and Mahabbir. II. ch. xxvii. 3. : .
3

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 36] =====
84

Dards, Aryas,' the inhabitants of Sinhapura and Barbaras ;
in Pisces, the shores of the ocean, substances coming from
the sea, great people, wise men, and those who get their
living by water. The consequences of (an eclipse of the sun
or moon in any of’) the lunar mansions must be told according
to the geographical division of the earth, taught (in ch. xiv.)*

. 43. There are ten kinds of obscuration, termed as follows:
Standing to the right, standing to the left, licking, biting at,
subduing, total obscuration, assailing, touching slightly, dark-
ness in the middle, and darkness at the outer edge.

44. When the eclipsing body stands to the right,’ mankind
will have plenty of rain, feel glad and safe; when to the left,
the people perish by depredations of kings and robbers.

45. The eo-called licking takes place when a tongue, as it
were, licks around the orb of the luminary (sun or moon).
At this event there is great joy amongst all beings on earth,
and an abundance of water.

46. They call it “ biting at,” when a quarter, or a third, or
even the half is obecured. Then wealthy monarchs lose their —
treasures, and wealthy countries suffer. ,

47, When the obscuration, after beginning at the extre-
mities, continues thickened in the middle, it is known under
the name of “subduing,” and brings great joy to all creatures.

48. It is a “total obscuration” if the dark one long con-
tinues obscuring the whole disc; this occurring, he will de-
stroy the chief countries and the chief potentates.

49. If, after the end of an eclipse, Rahu immediately re-

e
* Utpala takes WITH appeliative, WUTHAATH, ‘Seigniors.’ It
seems more likely that the inhabitants of Aryavarta are meant,

® That is to say, when an eclipse occurs whilst the sum or moon Is
standing in each or such a Nakshatra, woe betides that part of the globe
which is allotted to the Nakshatra.

* Comm. : wafe Tet Seat Wacerse (er) efeqarara |
Farther is explained what is meant with the right and left side of the

००० 220 ००००: सद अदर यहद आग्नेयां राहोराममनं सव्बनिश्यान्या-
wea | Weare seat wal तेकत्यामपसन्यमिति ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 37] =====
35

tarns and appears again, it is styled “assailing,”! which is
terrific because of the internecine wars waged by the kings.

50. When you eee, as it were, a mirror covered at one spot
with vaporous breathing, it is the obscuration known as
“touching slightly;” it brings nice rain and fertility. _

51. When the darkness is confined to the middle, whereas
round it remains a bright ring,* it causes the ruin of the
middle-country, and danger from gastric diseases.

52. Very thick darkness at the extremities, and very little
in the middle, appears in the obscuration called “darkness at
the outer edge.” At'this it is to be dreaded that all sorts of
plagues of the country? will waste the grain, and unsafety
prevail on account of robbers.‘

58. When Réhu is white, one may announce safety and
copiousness of food, but suffering to the Brahmans; when
fire-red, danger of fires and affliction to smiths.

54. When greenish yellow, diseases will be frequent, and
the grain be lost by plagues of different kind; when russet,

* The scholiast does not fail to observe the impossibility of this cases
य्येतन्नोपपय्ते । तथापि पूर्वशाखरागुखारेशावार्यैणोक्नम्‌ ।

* Utpala again remarks that this can only happen with solar eclipses,
and he adduces the reason why.

* The definition of {7G ic. TAYIZAT: bs given in this distich s
अतिवुष्टिरनावुष्टिमुषकाः शलभाः गुकाः।
अग्ासत्रा्च राजानः षडेते स्वोतयः सुताः ॥

* Parallel passages to rv. 43-52 are quoted in the Comm. from Part-
gara and Kicyapa. For comparison’s sake the latter passage, being
also the shorter of the two, here follows. QTY WwW: |

सव्ये तु सुभि स्लादपसवे तु तखराः।

जरे (१1. लोड) प्रजाः प्रहष्टाः (१.1. दर्पिताः) सरयख्ं चोकनाद्वम्‌ ॥

निरोधे बनहरषः खादारोहे गुपयद्धयः।

आमर्दे चापमंं सयं yaar पार्थिवाः ॥

खच्छवप्रदें यदाघ्रातं तदिवुदधधे ।

मध्वे तमखि सन्दृष्टे पोडये्मष्यदे लान्‌ ।

पन्ते तमसि इषे खद्धानामीतिनं मवम्‌ 8 =ˆ

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 38] =====
36
swift-going animals and barbarians perish, and famine pre-
vails.

55. When coloured like the rising sun, there will be dearth,
lack of rain, and distress amongst birds ; when showing a dark
purple tinge, one may predict security, abundance, and little
rain.

56. When pigeon-dyed, red, russet, or gray, danger of
famine may be positively announced. A pigeon-coloured and
Dlack-tinged Rahu produces sickness amongst the CAdras.

57. One that is yellow as the topaz! is pernicious to the
Vaigyas, but conducive to abundance of food. At one that
is flaming, there is apprehension of fires; at one looking like
red chalk, war.

58. Is it that Rabu appears gray like the stalks of Dab-
grass, then you may announce that there shall be pestilence.
‘When he resembles the trumpet flower, he brings danger
from thunderbolts.

69. Being dust-coloured, or red, he is fatal to the Ksha-
triyas and the rains; showing the hue of the morning sun, __
the nelumbium speciosum, or the rainbow, he tends to excite
the raging of arms.

° 60. Mercury, on seeing the sun or moon eclipsed, occasions
the los of ghee, honey, oil, and of sovereigns ; Mars, slaughter
in hostile encounters, raging of fires, and danger from
robbers.

61. Venus (when looking on an eclipse) causes the destruc-
tion of corn and manifold annoyances on earth. Saturn
brings drought, tcarcity, and unsafety on account of robbers.

62. Any evil produced by a planet through its look, at the
beginning or end of an eclipse, is allayed by the look of
Jupiter, as burning fire is quenched by water.

63, When, during an eolipse, the following foretokens arise,
vis., storm, fall of meteors, dust, earthquake, darkness, and

‡ fwawafeq is in Wilson’s Dictionary rendered by crystal, but that
cannet be the acceptation of the term here. From the yellow colour
we may infer that it is one of the different sorts of stone which are
Wweewn under the name of ‘oriental topaz,’ as chrysolith or corindon.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 39] =====
37

-thunder-strokes, then another eclipse takes place after six
months, twelve months, and further in regular succession.!

64. By Mars partaking of an eclipse,’ the country people
of Avanti, those who dwell near the banks of the Kavert and
Nerbadda, and proud monarchs, become afilicted.

- 65. Mercury (in the same case) ruins the Doab, the Sarayd,
Nepal, the eastern ocean, the Sone, women, kings, soldiers,
lads, and scholars.

66. When Jupiter becomes obscured, scholars, kings, min-
isters, elephants, horses, perish; besides those who dwell along
the banks of the Indus and the inhabitants of the north.

67, 68. By Venus becoming eclipsed, the Daserakas, Ke-
kayas, Yauddheyas, the inhabitants of Aryavarta, Cibis, and
women, ministers, and companies suffer; by Saturn, the in-
habitants of the desert, the Pushkaraa, Surashtrians, minerals,
the people of Mount Arbuda, the lowest classes of the popula-
tion, the Gomanta® and Pariydtra mountaineers go to de-
struction very soon.

"Comm. Wars WUT: |

STH UST VT बलवान्वाति ATT: |
माखे षे तदा विदयाद्राहोरागमनं War a
उच्कायां दादे मासे रसादे तचा ।
भुकम तु चतुर्वि विंशे तमसि निर्दिशेत्‌
षटि * शनिपाते स्यात्‌ सवेषु स्यात्षडुन्तरे ४

* A planet is said to be ‘eclipsed,’ when, at the time of an eclipse,
it is standing in the same sign or asterism (दाचि) कि ध sua or
moon, and having nearly the came latitude with one of these. Utpala
expresses himself in this way: WHTST ATCIURTUT WIS VVNT-
UR A ग्रहो "केण चद्रेण वा सिक शो भवति तष चातिविषिप्नो
भ भवति। तदाच्छादगाद्वाहकस् (सो "णट्श्ो भवति । तैन wantlog
in some 3188.) यस्त दुच्यते 8

® The scholiast ए, गोमन्तः पार (४०७४ 19 © 3188. ॥5 भतत
मोमन्तपा०) ००९ षप, गोमन्तः ७ ०० appellative noun, paraplrasing
it by aft farat: * possessors, breeders of kine.’ Cf however cb. xvi. 17,
where the word is certainly the name of the mountaia or hill district.
To rome Codd. of the Comm. are added the words: @feaitder (v2

गोनद) इति पटन्ि

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 40] =====
88

69. Rahu, seen in the month Karttika! afflicts the smiths,
the Magadhas, the potentates of Eastern Hindustan, the
Koealas, Kalmashas, (irasenas, and Kacis; he will also soon
strike the king of Kalinga, with his councillors and servants,
and bring the Kehatriyas to grief, but produce safety and

plenty.

70. In Margagtrsha he will hurt the Kashmirians, Kausa-
lakas, and Pundras, the wild beasts and people of the western
marches; he aleo crushes the drinkers of Soma, but brings
beautiful rains, safety, and abundance.

71. By an eclipse in Pausha, the Brahmans and Kshatriyas
meet with adversity, and the Sindhians, Kukuras, and Videhas
become ruined. Moreover, one may be sure that there will
be little rain, unsafety, and dearth,

72, Rahu, when seen in Maghs, afflicts those as are piously
attached to their parents, those who bear the family name of
Vasishtha,* the sedulous students of Scripture, the elephants
and horses, the people of Anga, Vangs, and Kaci; but yields
rain to the heart’s wish of husbandmen.

78. An eclipse in the month of Phalguna causes distress `
to the Vangas, Acmakas, Avantis, Mekalas, dancers, grains,
noble ladies, bowyers, Kshatriyas, and ascetics.

74. By an eclipse in Caitra, grief is caused to the painters,
writers, singers, to those whose beauty is venal,? to Vaidio
scholars, gold merchants, the Pundras, Orissees, Kekayas, and

1 Properly: at fall moon or at new moos. Comm.: UTQATSIAT-
Wert (v2. पौदंमामावास्ता) वा कर्को.

© Utpala expresses himself accurately in saying: faut ATW
धेषाम्‌ whence follows that Vesishthe is a nomen of a gens, like the
Reman Julius, Cornelius, with this difference, that in Latin not only
ts sald Cornelil, as in Sanskrit, Vasishthab, but also Cornelius, whereas
in Sanskrit, in names of tribes and nations, a simple individual is de-
noted by a derivative, e.g. Vésishtha = one out of the family called
Vesishthe. The mythical ancestor of the Vasishtha-vanca is the Rshi
Vasishtha, one of the stars of the Great Bear, in the same way as the
oun is the ancestor of the Sirya-vaiica.

® Schol. QaTeat:s the expression in the text reminds one of the
Latin corpore quasetum faciens.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 41] =====
Agmakas ; in the same year the Rain-god will distribute the
rain unequally.

75. By an eclipse in the month of Vaicékhs, cotton, sesam,
and beans will be lost; the Ikshvakus, Yaudheyas, Scythians,
oa Kalingas meet with calamity, but there will be plenty of

वि

76, By one in Jyaishths, sovereigns, Brahmans, and queens,
the grain crops, rain, great associations, the people of the
north, the SAlvas, and also the savage tribes, come to per-
dition.

77. When an eclipse occurs in Ashfdhs, one may say that
tanks, dikes,' rivers, streams, men living on fruits and roots,
the Gandharians, Kashmirians, Pulindas, and Chinese, are
undone; only in some districts rain* will fall.

78. An eclipse seen in Cravana will strike the Kashmirians,
Pulindas, Chinese, Yavanas, the people of Kuru-field, the
Gandharians, the Middle-country, the Kambojas, and also one-
hoofed animals and corn sown in autumn. In other quarters
than those here specified, it makes the earth filled with people
rejoicing at the plenteousness of food. :

79. The demon, when appearing in Bhaédrapada, produces
plenty, but causes to perish the Kalingas, Vangas, Magadhas,
Surashtrians, Barbarians, Suviras, Dards, and Scythians, and
unborn children likewise.

80. When seen in Acvins, the demon greatly promotes
abundance, but he will strike the Kambojas, Chinese, Yavanas,
and also the surgeons, Bahitkas,? the people dwelling along
the banke of the Indus, the Anartas, Pundras, Kirdtas, and
physicians.‘

1 The Comm. takes खदपानवप्र 9 ००८ compound ; उदपानं WaT
आरः । बापोकूपतडामादि । तस्व चोदपाणद् वपं तटः, (1७ ध
lation attempts to retain the probably studied ambiguity of the text.

° 0००००. सष्डलवर्दं भवति । क्रचिचिद्र्तीवर्धः ।

® In this way the word is written in those MSS. that generally follow
&@ correct orthography.

* For comparison’s sake a passage from Paricara is quoted, as being
the counterpart to v. 69-80. WaTY WITT |

तथ कार्तिके सुभिदतेमाय काधिकोडलनूरवेनामावायव । मावर

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 42] =====
40

81. There are ten ways in which the separation in a solar
and lunar eclipee takes place, denominated as follows: piero-
ing the jaw, piercing the loins, piercing the anus, each of two
kinds; bespitting, consuming, splitting the middle, and split-
ting the edge. «

82. The separation in the south-east is known by the name
of “ piercing the right jaw,” namely, in the case of a lunar
eclipee.' This occurring, the corn will be wasted, mouth
diseases be prevalent, kings be afflicted, but the rains
favourable.

83. “Piercing the left jaw” is the separation in the north-
east; it is dangerous to princes royal; and one must expect
diseases of the mouth, danger of war; yet, at the same time,
abundance of food.

84. Should the emergence happen in the south, then it is
called “piercing the right loin.” Kings’ sons will suffer by
it; no other but southern enemies should be attacked.*

85. And if Rahu goes away northward, it is what they
term “ piercing the left loin ;” then women miscarry and the _

grain crops are but middling.

मृगपुण्डुसोमपभयायावुष्टये। पौदे भयदुर्भिषब्रह्मषचोपरोधाय । माधे
शस्रप्रकोपाय प्रवृद्धये बद्खाद्ानरतेकयवनकादिदेधोत्सादगटकु ।
फारुने न सम्यञ्च गटनतेकधनुष्करसस्यविनाशाय। Fase waa.
एडोदुद्राचेषु (2 ›158. द्राचेषु and Pray) वुषसस्यामावाय । च्य
ध्येठनुपपत्रोगणमुष्यसस्योपद्रवाय । सालनिषादवृटष्व॑साया (7 )18
वुष्टिसघ्रामा षाड 1 ग्रादये चेमसुभिमन्य्र घौनकाप्मोरपुलिन्द-
आन्धारेभ्बः । भाद्रपदे ममधदरत्क (118. द राक) लिङ्खाङ्गवङ्गानयाय
setae | wage सुभिदचेमायावन्िकनारोकागर्तेक-
ग्योवतिन्यवानामभमवाययेति ॥ 1८ ॥५ वल that Vardha-mibira had this
passage hefore his mind, but he must have followed other authorities
teo, and here and there another reading than is exhibited above; this
applies especially to the passage about an eclipse in Ashadha.

! For the case of a solar eclipse, see v. 91.

* Utpala observes the imaginary character of this and the following
separation: UASTUTAS Ut Afertwararer <feornc
चोर्दिथोमासमोषौ न कदाचिदपि भवतः। आचार्ये पूरवधराखानुसा-
Reet!

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 43] =====
41

86. “ Piercing the right side of the anus” takes place in the
south-west; “ piercing the left side of it” in the north-west.!
In both cases there will be diseases of the hidden parts, and
little rain; in the latter case the queen shall die.

87. If the darkness begin from the east, and go away the
same side, then they name it “ bespitting ;”* it brings safety,
‘eorn, and contentment to mankind.

88. When the first contact in an eclipse is in the east, and
the separation in the west, it is what they call “consuming.”
Then, O! where shall people find protection, anxiously agi-
tated as they are by fear of famine and war?

89. If brightness reappears first in the middle, the separa-
tion is named “splitting the middle;” it causes intestine
troubles, bestows abundance, and yields not too much rain?

90. Brightness at the extremities and thick darkness in
the middle is seen at what is termed “splitting the edge;”
thereby the Middle-country gets ruined, and the grains sown
in autumn will be lost.

91. All these kinds of separation must be stated as occur-
ring also with (an eclipse of) the sun} but what in the case of
the moon is East, has to be applied, in the case of the sun, to
the West.

92. A rain of dust within a week after the end of an eclipee
causes the loss of the grain, mist brings danger of sickness,
an earthquake the death of a great monarch. ‘

93. A meteor causes a minister to perish; variegated clouds,
extraordinary unsafety; thunder, the miscarrying of the preg-
nant clouds ;‘ lightning, vexation by the king and mordacious
animals,®

“} The Comm. r. Qqaearaaat, and supplies qafy.

* The original meaning of the term USES or WEA, as we Sind in
& passage from Kacyapa, is left unexplajned hy the scholiast.

* ९०००. एतदष्योत्पातिकं । चतो मणितमोलशविद्दम्‌ ॥ The same
is repeated in the following verse.

* Bo the ८०००. भर्भलचयोक्ा अच चयाः, There is, however, no
cogent reason for this, and it might as well mean: ‘of the pregnant
women.”

* ‘These animals are, as the schollast intimates : खपेवराहश्प्रमुतकः,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 44] =====
42

94. A halo causes distress in consequence of sickness; the
glow of the sky, danger from the part of the ruler and from
fires; a rough wind, unsafety, owing to thieves.

95. A whirlwind, a rainbow, or a staff in the air,' brings
danger of famine and hostile invasion; a planetary battle,
strife between sovereigns; the appearance of a comet does

“+ the same.

96. When rain, without any unnatural symptom, falls
within a week, one may predict abundance, and all the bale-
fal influences whatever of the eclipse shall come to nought.

97. In case there be an eclipse of the sun a fortnight after
the end of a lunar one, distress* shall be amongst the people,
and mutual hatred between husband and wife.

98. But should (as many days) after a solar eclipee be seen
one of the moon, then the Brahmans shall obtain the reward
of manifold sacrifices, and the people have great joy.

Cuarrer VI.

The Course of Mars.

1. If Mars* commence his retrograde motion in the ninth,
eighth, or seventh lunar mansion from that in which he roee
heliacally, the retrogradation is termed “the hot one.” This

* The rendering of TES by ‘staff in the alr,’ is only a makeshift, for,
although a description or definition of the phenomenon is given ch. xxx.
y. 16, and ch. xivil. v. 19, I have not been able to find out its precise
nature,

* The Comm. wrongly renders WHY by FAY ‘bed bebavicar,’ as
the author evidently meant the compound W% + WY, not G+ Wy.
Cf. Goldstiicker’s Dictionary, s.v. WHY.

® It is strange that im the text the moan proper Is omitted. To
accoast for the emission we must assume that in the anthor’s autograph
every chapter was headed with the words: WW—NTCwaa or WH—;
this chapter, ¢g., must have boon inscribed We WYATT: or We afte

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 45] =====
43

causes suffering, at the period of the planet's rising again, to
those who deal with fire (smiths, etc.).'

2. When Mars becomes retrograde in the twelfth, eleventh,
or tenth mansion, it bears the name of “the weeping face.”
At the time of the heliacal rising it will vitiate the essences
and produce diseases and drought.

3. The retrogradation beginning in the thirteenth or four-
teenth mansion is “the serpent,” and shows its effects at the
period of the heliacal setting. It brings vexation through
mordacious animals, serpents, and wild beasts, but plenteous-
ness too.

. “ Bloody face” is the name of the retrogradation
Mars moves backward in the fifteenth or sixteenth mansion.
This brings instantly mouth diseases, unsafety, and, at the
same time, abundance.

5. “Sword and club” is the retrogradation beginning in
the seventeenth or eighteenth mansion. It causes at the
period of the planet’s returning to the right motion® distress ~
owing to gangs of robbers, drought, and danger of war.

6. When Mars, after rising in Pirva-Phalguni or Uttara-
Phalgun!, goes back in Uttara-Ashadhé, and sets in Robint,
he oppresses all the three worlds.

7. The retrogradation of Mars, after he has risen in Qra-
vana, occurring in Pushya, brings woe to the anointed heads
of monarchs! (Asa general rule) those people that accord-
ing to the distribution of the countries of the globe® belong

* Utpala observes that this case is an Impossible one, or, as he pats
it, an unnatural one, whilst Le accounts in the asual way for the anther’s
mentioning the case.

* Comm. : मुकरक्क्करादयः Cf. ch. v. 98.

*Comm.: WTR WEAMTAAA भौमे. Ch Ind. Studien, x.
7. 206,

* Comm.: aUifufirarert TUT. ९००५५५०० 0०४ कभभ?

खदितः wag aia: Ta aa waefe |
मूधाभिवि्या रावानो विनश्चेयुः परद्यरम्‌ 8
* In ch. xiv. Exceptions te the rale are given in v."13, below.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 46] =====
44
to the mansion in which Mars happens to rise, are hurt by
him.

8. When the blood-red planet takes his crooked course
midst through the stars of Maghd, then the king of Pandya:
perishes, unsafety arises by the outbreak of war, and drought °
prevails.

9. Mars causes famine when, after going midst through
= junction star of MaghA," he takes his course right through
the junction star of Viga&khé. By passing through the juno-
tion star of Rohini he brings horrible pestilence.

10. In going south of (the star) Rohint, Mars has a depres-
sive influence on the prices,’ and obstructs the rain. When
appearing wrapt in smoke, or having a crest, he will crush
the inbabitants of the Pariydtra hills.

11. When moving in Rohini, Qravana, Mila, Uttara-
Phalgunt, Uttara-AshddhA, Uttara-Bhadrapadd, or Jyeshtha,
Mars damages the cloudy masses.

12, Auspicious is his moving or rising in Gravana, Maghd,
Punarvasu, Mls, Hasta, Pirva-Bhadrapada, Acyini,VicAkha, _
and Rohint.?

18. When Mars shows a large and bright surface, the hue

" ००. मीनौ ° ङ्गारको मघां भिश्वा मघायां योगतारकमेदं एला
अदि विश्राखां भिन्दन्‌ तामपि पुगर्मिनन्ति । तदा दुर्भिषं चुञ्जयं
करोति ॥ यदिच रोहिदो' भिर्वा ofa Ofeat योगतारकभेदनं
WET गच्छति । तदा ₹० आर. Ch. about He, fey ch. ix. v. 24,
note, and aboat the occultation of the junction star of Maghi especially,
४. १ 28. .

* Unpela says: wie fray: erat वृषटेनिद्रहद्चाभावः, 1४४
hewever, not quite certain whether अर्थस्य (as it is written in some
MSS.) of Wie is intended. Uncommonly low prices, it must be
understood, are certainly a sign of declining proeperity.

+ © Exceptions to the general rale contained in the second part of v. 7
(४०७ above). The statements of this verse moreover supersede or restrict,
according to Utpala, v. 11: RTSTU WAT CMAN "यम्‌. 1;
weald seem mere correct te ceasider the want of rain (v. 11) to be an
exception to the generally nuspicions character of the conjunctures
mentioned ia v. 13.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 47] =====
45

of the flowers of the Butea frondosa or red Asoka, distinct
and serene rays, the lustre of red-hot copper, and moves along
the northern road, he brings blessing to the kings and satis-
faction to the people.

Cuarrer VII.
The Course of Mercury.

1, Mercury never rises without portents: he causes danger
of inundation, fire, wind, or occasions the (sudden) lowering
or rising of the corn prices.

2. By crushing* in his course Cravana, Dhanishtha, Rohint,
Mrgaciras or Uttara-Ashédhé, he produces drought and dan,
of sickness. ध

` " 40८ ४० 0०४. चसित्रचते सखितखस्ो्रमाभे यदि याति. 1»

support of this view he cites Paricara: MUTY UUIYC | TACHA

WMATA Sayin: Aravaisafears a wiry
प्रदधिणगतिः काकः खिग्धस् कलश्ोपमः।
तप्तका्नसद्ुग शो भवेद्लोकविवु्ये ॥

He adds that the expression may be explained otherwise: Way Wt

व्थाचयते यथा भरण्डादिर्मघान्त उश्तरो मार्गः. This, indeed, is the
definition of SUTATA in ch. ix. v. 6, and, in order to show that the
author might have meant the same here, he quotes Garga:

were wa: 1
याम्यादि ८ wet arg
भाम्बादि तु मध्यमं मा्गमु्यते ४
शआषाडढाद्यञ्धिनान्तं तु दिशं समुदाहतम्‌ ।

सौम्बमार्गख्ितो भौमः प्रजानां हितकारकः ॥
The neuter gender of HTa Is a volecism, probably due to the copyists,
ef. ch. ix. v. 1-6.

* 4.0, ‘goes midst through,” or ‘causes the occultation of,’ as the
Behol. says: मर्दनं मेदः. Whether here precisely the junction stars
are meant, is doubtful. At all events some of the statements in the
text Imply an impossibility: WerTy Wifey wwreerfey
उद्वति । चाचार्थेथो पूवश्राखागुखारोख" CL note to v. 4 below.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 48] =====
46

8. When Mercury approaches Ardr4, Punarvasu, Aclesha,
and Magha,' people will suffer by war, danger of famine,
sickness, drought, and grief.

4. The planet in its course oppressing * Hasta, Citra, SvAti,
Vigikha, Anur&dhd, and Jyeshthd, is disastrous to the cows,
yet at the eame time makes the prices of oils and essences
rise, and the land yield copious food.

5. The same whilst crushing? Uttara-Phalgun!, Kyttika,
Uttara-Bhadrapada, and Bharani, occasions the waste of the
elements of the body.

6. When Mercury crushes Agvin!, Catabhishaj, Mala, and
Bevati, he damages merchandise,‘ physicians, boatmen, pro-
ducts of the sea (as pearls, eto.), and horses.

7. Bhould he oppress either Pdrva-Phalgunt, or Pirva-
Ashaghé, or Parva-Bhadrapadé, then he brings, during his
course, to mankind danger of famine, war, robbery, and sick-
ness.

8. In the doctrinal work by Pardicara are mentioned seven
stations of Mercury, divided over the lunar mansions; they

* The text has only WUTFMR ‘ having approached, standing in,’ but
o the Comm. supplies ‘and crashing,’ उपाभिते वसिते । तानिवोमूद्र-
af विचरति, A perallel passage from KAcyapa has :
रौद्रादीनि यदा पल नचवादीण्डुगन्द्नः।
भिनत्ति चखदुर्भिशब्धाधिभिः पोदधाते षबत्‌ ॥

* ८०४०. खपपीडयन्योगतारकाभ्भिब्दन्‌ | ANTS STN: |
हस्तादीनि चरन्‌ षटु नचचादोण्दुगन्दनः। .
जवामभुभदः पोकः सुभिचचेमकारकः

* Comm. निश्रतुपमदंयन्‌ ,

{ The Schol. combines W@ with Mtferw, and interprets accordingly :
बखिकपरमुतीनाम्‌, 0४६ this is too great a license, because

WW ७ ०५०००८०८ ०० जीविका ०८०४, भिषम्‌,

° The parallel pessage from Kacyape bears :
‘ Fares चरन्‌ मौमो भेदं छला यदा AAA
चुष्छखतखरभविः करोति प्राशिषां वधम्‌ 8

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 49] =====
47

are termed the natural, the mixed, the compact, the poignant,
the extreme, the dreadful, and the baleful station.

9. Svati, Bharani, Rohint, and Kyttiké form what is called
the “natural station.” The “ mixed station” is indicated as
consisting of Mrgaciras, Ardra, Maghd, and Acleshé.

10. In the “compact station” are Pushys, Punarvasu, and
both Phalgunis; in the “poignant” one, the two Bhadra-
padas, Jyeshtha, Acvini, and Revatt.

11. The “extreme station’”’* of Mercury comprehends Mila
and both Ashadhas; the “dreadful station,” Cravans, Citra,
Dhanishtha, and also Catabhishaj.

12, 13. Hasta, Anur&dha, and Vigfkha ere the “baleful
station.” The same author has indicated the stations also by
stating the number of days of rising and setting; to wit,
forty, thirty, twenty-two, eighteen, nine, fifteen, and eleven
days the planet is standing in the natural station, and the
rest in succession.*

The passage which Variha-mihira almost copied from the Rshi’s
work, is quoted in the Comm. MQTY GUC:

अवास्त गतयः ST | HEAT विभिग्ना सद्धिप्ना तीरूवा चोरा पापां
थोमान्तिको (*५< चौर) च । तच प्राता याम्याग्नेयरोहिशोवाय-
श्वानि । विभिन्ना (vl frm) सौम्धाद्भामलादधेषा च ( गवा)
सद्धि्ता पुष्वार्यम्खभाम्बादित्वानि। तोख्या अनायानि Tete ATT
चरा चीणि अवणादीनि लाद । पापा साविेद्राग्बि (५ ग्व)
भिषाणि । योगान्िको (**५० चौर) मलाषाडे (५०).

2 The origin and purport of the ४० योमान्तिका (जतिः) ts net
clear, and the rendering of it by ‘extreme’ (properly, ‘ being at the end
of the period’?) questionable. From the form @YQvat in v. 8 wo may
infer that Vartha-mibira considers WYATfATST to be the feminine te
WreTATE, formed with Samisinta WY, so that the word is no com-
pound with fiery, but with Way. Another form (see below) is
यौगान्तिको, 19 the feminine gender ; this seems te be the preferable,
not to say the only correct form; it is no compound at all, but a
derivative from # compound योमान्ि

* This passage implies that Mercary, when rising in the natural
station, will be visible for forty days, and, ikewise, when setting in i,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 50] =====
48

14. The planet moving in the natural station, there will
be healthiness, rain, good growth of the grains, and safety ;
when in the compact and mixed stations, the good is not un-
mixed; when in the rest, quite the contrary is to be.

16. After the opinion of Devala there are four motions (or

continue invisible during the same period. Utpala says—Qeanfey-
दिति। एतानि चलारिंदादीनि दिनानि प्रारृतादोनां मतीनामुदये `
प्रवासे प्रमाय । तथधा प्राछतायां यतौ यरि बुधः सित उदेति
तदा चलारिं्दिनगान्युदित एव तिषटिति । अधाणमेति तदा चलाररिः
अदिनाग्बस्मित एव तिष्टति। एवं मचाया बिंशत्‌ Ke We. Farther:
waft बदितवासनयेतत्रोपपथते तथापि पराश्रमतमङ्गोछल्वाचार्थे-
शोकं । तथाच पराशरः

अव चत्वारि शचि विंशरत्यष्टादशपददशैकादश्मवराषाखि गति-
ऋमादुदितो -भिदृश्षते । तान्बिवाखमितो भवति । उष्यश्नोतवाटथ

(*.बायुवप) सू्यनुप्रहानायेदयति स्दविधातायच 8. The Scholiast .
acquaints us that some other ancient authorities taught the same as

Partcare, for, says be: W Saw पराद्यरेयोक्तं UTTMAT TTA |
ware Gard:

अलारं श्तराछटतायां गतावालच्छति बुधः ।

मासमेकं बिभिश्ायां दर्भचिलाखमुख्छति ॥

ext दार्विंद्तिं साधौ सद्धिप्तामेन् लच्छते ।

खष्टादथाहं तीरूथाया घोरायां रश पच ॥ `

घापायां पादहोनानि तथैकादप् तिषति।

यौगान्तिक्धामिन्डुसूगुर्गवाहं लष्छते तथा ॥

चारकालो य एवोक्तः सोमपुषद्छ भागद्षः।

अकालः ख एव खात्मूयैमण्डलवारियः ॥

तथाच काश्चपः। .
अल्वारिं तणा चिद्‌ दिनानि दौ (५०) च विंदतिः।

खष्टादधया्भमाडद दशर वेकदुतानिष ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 51] =====
49

stations), namely, the direct, the very crooked, the crooked,
and the defective motion. The periods of the planet moving
right, eto., are, respectively, thirty, twenty-four, twelve, and
six days.

16. The “direct” motion is wholesome to the people; the
“very crooked” one destroys wealth ;* the “crooked” one
brings danger of war; the “defective” motion produces un-
safety and sickness.

17. Mercury, when visible in the month of Pausha, Ashi-
dha, CQravana, Vaicikhs, or Maghs, is dangerous to man-
kind, but his heliacal setting in the same produces salutary
effects.

18. When the same is visible in the month of Karttika or
Agvins, then he brings about danger of water, thioves, fires,
sickness, inundation, and famine.

19. Towns which are besieged whilst Mercury has set,
shall be released at his rising. Other authorities, however,

भवच प्राहतायासु लोमजसूदितखणा।
अस्टद्रतः सर्वकालं तिष्ठतीति विभिखषः ॥
Utpela adds that Varthe-mibira himself bolds by no means the same
opinion with the aathorities copled by him: WIMTerQrererfirert |
अतः समाससंहितायामनेनेवोहम्‌
पराछतविमिग्रसद्धिप्ततीरूययौयाकघोरपापास्ाः
मतयो लचथमासा नोदयदिविधिः सुढठं भवति ॥ `
१,7.17 87. 1१ 1,
0५०५: प्रह्णदिव या साभाविको गतिः सा खल्व । वक्रं करिये
निलमाभितस्त मन्दगहय् चदा भुक्यमावो भवति तदा अतिगक्ा
मतिष्च्यते । युं मार्थं परिव्ण्य भिवु्भिं करोति खा वक्रा । विकला
वेकारिवी (v2. धैवाखिकी) जति गयूणा ॥ 89 ०७५ 198. 8५२००,
x. p. 205,
+ Some MSS. of the Comm. write WU, others WW, bat all concar ia
४००००; दुर्भिदं करोति, .

4

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 52] =====
- 479

say that the (invested) towns shall be taken in case Mercury
rises in the west.)

20. When Mercury shines like gold, or is parrot-coloured,
or resembles the chrysoprase stone,’ and shows a smooth and
large surface, he is salutary ; otherwise, disastrous.

-2 Te these ‘other authorities’ belongs Nandin. Comm.
“ware watt

चच्चाधादुदिते सौम्ये चमति पुररोधकः।

पुनः प्ानुदितै तस्धिन्‌ पुरमोषं विनिर्दिधेत्‌ ॥

Whether this Nandin be the same as the grammarian of the name
(Celobrecke, Misc. Ess. II. 49) is unknown; not likely.

8 phe rendering of WEWATY ts doubtfal.

(To be continued.) ।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 53] =====
B= Va

” Cnarrer VIII.
Jupiter's Course.

1. Each year (during which Jupiter completes a twelfth
part of his revolution) has to bear the name of the lunar
mansion in which he rises; the years follow each other in
the same order as the lunar months.

2. The years Karttika and following comprehend two lunar
mansions beginning with Kyttiké and eo on, in regular suo-

‘This verse has been treated at full length by Davis in his admirable
paper on the Indian Cycle of Sixty Years in As. Res, III. 217, seg. In
it = part of Utpala’s commentary also is given in translation. The
reading followed by Davis, as appears from his translation, is: WU@Q
सषहोदयमस्तं वा येन arf geet, which is mentioned also in the
Var. Lect. to the edited text. The comparison of the MSS. leaves little
doubt that this reading is a correction, suggested by the remark of
Utpala, that in case the pianet should set in one and rise im another
Nakshatra, only that name must he taken which agrees with the order
of the month. It may happen that the Jovial year is called Margacir-
sha, although the planet sets in it, and this does not seem te agree with
the author’s rule, but enly those names of Nakshatras can be used,
from which the names of the lunar months are derived ; even if Jupiter
rises in Rohiy!, the year cannot be called Rauhiya, there being no meath
of the name. The addition of the word HTERARY implies the rele
which is expressed in the reading followed by Davis. Cf. also Warren,
Kila Senkalita, p. 197, seg., and Whitney’s remarks o& Sdrya 8.14, 17.

6

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 54] =====
52

cession, except the fifth, eleventh, and twelfth years, to each
of which appertain three asterisms.!

8. In the year of Karttiks, waggoners, those who have to
deal with fire (emiths), and cows, suffer; sickness and war
rage, but all sorts of red and yellow flowers thrive.

4. In the year of Margagirsha will be drought and loss of
the grains, owing to wild beasts, mice, grasshoppers, and
birds; there is danger of sickness, and monarchs get into
hostilities even with their friends.

5. Paushs is a happy year to mankind; the kings make
an end to their quarrels, the grains will sell at double and
thrice the prime cost, and all actions tending to promote
welfare have good success.

6. In Magha the Ancestors are extremely honoured, and
all creatures feel satisfaction; there is health, rain, good
prices, and acquisition of friends.

7. In the year of Philguna one may expect in a few places
safety, prosperity, and corn. Women will be neglected by
their husbands, thieves be numerous, and sovereigns cruel. _

8 In Caitra there is slight rain and dearth, but safety
prevails and the kings rule mildly. Pulse* thrives; beautiful

will have to suffer.

9. In Vaigdkha both people and kings will obey the laws
and feel safe and glad; sacrifices are carried on happily, and
all kinds of crops succeed.

10. In Jyaishtha such as are eminent by caste, family
wealth, craft,‘ kings, and those who know the law, have to

1 To the fifth year, PhAlguna, the corresponding mansions are: Pirva-
Phalguni, Uttars-Phalgus!, and Hasta; to the eleventh, Bbidrapeda:
Getabbishaj, Pirva-Bhadrapada, and Uttara-Bhadrapedi ; te the last
year, Agvayaja: Revatl, Acviat, and Bbarayt
. * 0००. कोद्मधान्यस्ड शिम्विधान्यदय सुव्रदेवुडिः.

® Some MSS. write WTfH; as no paraphrase of the word is given, it
remains uncertain what the commentator meant.

“The term Wait bs the counterpart of the Latin erde, especially in
its mere restricted sense, ¢.g. in orde publicanerum. The definition by
the ०८००००६ ४, बद्धनां खमानजातोचानां सद्धः चेली.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 55] =====
: 68 .

suffer, a8 well as the crops, barring panic seed, and the genus
of leguminosa.'

11. In Ashfdha grain will grow at some places; clse-
where drought prevails, Increase of wealth and safety
there is, albeit indifferently, and the monarchs are turbulent.

12. In the year of (ravana there is safety, and the grains
grow duly ripe; but the vile infidels, and those that cling
to them, have to suffer.

13. In Bhadrapada the creepers (amongst the leguminosa)*
and the early corn succeed well, but the late corn does not
get on ; somewhere there is abundance, elsewhere uneasiness.

14. In the year of Acvayuja the rains fall continually ;
there is gaiety amongst the people, and safety; all creatures
increase in strength and have plenty of food.

15. Jupiter, when moving in the north of the lunar man-
sions, produces health, abundance and safety; when in the
south, the reverse; when in the middle, he exercises an in-
fluence holding the mean between both extremities.

16. When he makes in his course two mansions during a
year, he is auspicious ; when two and a half, his influence is
neither good nor evil; should he, perchance, go through
more, then he destroys the grain crops.

17. When the planet looks red like fire, there will be
danger of fires; when yellow, sickness; when gray, a battle
is impending ; when greenish yellow, one has to suffer from
robbers, and when blood-red, from the force of arms.

18. Drought prevails when Jupiter has the hue of smoke;
when he is visible at day, the king will be killed; but when
the planet is seen at night, large, spotless and bright, the
people will enjoy well-being.

* Comm. weiterfaferente: |

* It is manifest that these infidels, QETET:, are the Banddhas, for
because the year happens te be called Crivana, suffering must come te
the Crivakas. The whole of astrology is based om such quibbles, which
It would be tedious and useless to point out in every instance. Cf ch.
ix. 83.

* 6०००. जुद्गादिकम्‌ . ` .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 56] =====
54

19. Rohini.and Kyttiké are (figuratively) the body of the
year; both Ashadhfs, the navel; Agleahi, the heart;
Maghf, the flower.' These being free of evil influences,*
the effects will be good; but when the body is afflicted by a
cruel planet,? danger arises from fire and wind; when the
navel, danger is caused by famine; whenever the flower
eaffers, roots and fruits perish ; the heart being hurt, the corn
is lost most certainly.

20, 21. Multiply the years expired since the era of the
CQaka-king (i.e. the Gaka era) by eleven, and the product by
four; add 8589; divide the sum by 3750; to the quotient
add the (aka years; divide this by sixty (to find the cycles),
and the remainder by five; the quotient shows the number
of lustrums ruled by Vishnu, eto., and the remainder will be
years in their regular order.‘

22. Multiply the years by nine, and add one for every
twelve years ;° divide by foar; the quotient shows the num-
ber of mansions to reckon from Dhanishthd, and the re-
mainder shows the number of fourth-parts of the lunar man-
sion which have expired in the present year.® " .

*The term |YA or FAT is not explained by the commentator. It
probably denotes the centre of the heart, the seat of the soul, the
YRC of the Chindogya-Upanishad 8, 1, 1. ‘The Prilert मुस
(JAM) is Cakvotals, pp. 74 and 76 (ed. Bobtlingk), must also have
- the meaning of “soul, life.”

* de. mot visited by evil planets.

® ‘The cruel or evil planets (grake) are the San, Mars, and Satura.

‘ The principles of this compatation have beea explained by Davis,
As. Res. iil. pp. 219 and 215. In the latter passage, however, there is
an inaccaracy, loasmoch as the additive uomber or kehepe is not 4802,
as Davis has it, but 42044 = ("4"), according to the rule of Variba-
mibira, and 4291 according to that of the Jyotistattva. The same
Passage is almost literally a translation of Utpala’s Commentary.

® In the text r.

* Here a part of Utpala’s Commentary, the condition of which in my

MBS. leaves much to be desired: WHRTAWERTS धे गताः सविकला
अब्दा अनाः पुक्‌ खाप्याः । ताग्सविकलान्‌ पुथमेकच नवमिगुखथेत्‌।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 57] =====
55

23. Vishnu, Brhaspati, Indra, Agni, Tvashtar, Ahirbudhnya,
the Ancestors, Vicgve-Devas, the Moon, Indra-Agni, the
Agvins, and Bhaga, are indicated to be the lords of the
lustrums, successively. ,

24, The (first year of each lustrum called) Samvateara is
(ruled by) Agni; the second, Parivatsara, by the Sun; the
third, IdAvateara, by the Moon; the fourth, Anuvatsara, —
by the Creator; and the last, Udvatsara,' by Rudra.

25. In the first year of « lustram there is indifferent rain ;
in the second, rain falls only in the beginning of the season
(i.e. in Gravana and Bh&drapada); in the third, rain is very
copious; the fourth year brings rain in the later season (i.0.
only in Acvina and Karttika); the fifth year is said to give
very little rain.

26. Amongst these lustrums there are four excellent, viz.,
those ruled by Vishnu, Indra, Brhaspati, and Agni; the four
middlemost are indifferent, and the four last are reputed to
be very bad.

27. When Jupiter, on reaching the first quarter of Dha-
nishthé, rises in the lunar month of Magha, then begins

ततो दितोयस्ठानच्ेग्बो वर्तमानवष्यन्द्गतवयेभ्यो दादथमिदाद्रमि-
SACRE WE Aaa । The years are multiplied by 4, and divided
by 9, because a sign is equal ४० 23 १०५५५००; ततो गवाहइता अब्दा
जचवपादा भवन्ति राश्नाग्रकलवात्‌। तच दादथकमिेकेको TEATS
दीयते पुथकसादब्दसमूहायतस्तच वर्ददरादशकेन गकचपादमन्रं
भवति । चतुर्भिभाजे इते नववायि सकलानि खम्बनति । तेवा afte
रिका गणना चतो चनिष्ठा मुरौ षच्यन्द मवुत्तिः। यतो वच्छति ओं
निष्ठामिति (*. ५) अदेव शेषं भोष्यगकषपादा भवन्तोति ॥ `

* ११ 7. छटूत्सर्‌ ।७ preferable ० इहत्र 9 adopted in the printed
text, for it denotes the lest year. Cf. the Var. Lect. It must be added
that seme MSS. of the Comm. tee have UWMIT. Cé. alee Weber,
Naxatra, 3, 298. = :

 

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 58] =====
56

the first year of the cycle of sixty, named Prabhava, a year
salutary to all beings.'

28, At eome places, however, will be drought, and raging
of storms and fires; plagues of the country aleo and phlegm-
atic diseases are found in the course of this year of Prabhava; `
yet people will feel no serious grief.

29. The year following is known as Vibhava; the third is
Qukls; after it, Pramoda; and, finally, Prajapati. These
years and their effects are happy in an always increasing
degree.

30. Over countries where rice, sugar-cane, barley, and
other corn produce good crops, where dangers are pest,
hostilities stilled, mankind rejoicing, where the miseries of
the Iron Age have disappeared, the monarchs then hold their
sway.

81. In the second lustrom, the first year is Angiras; the
two following Qrimukha and Bhava; then Yuvan; finally,
DhAtar; these are the five years in due order.. Three out of
them are excellent; the two remaining middling. .
$2. In the former three years*® it rains sufficiently, and
people live free from affliction and dread. In the latter two
also it rains indifferently well, but diseases prevail and war
ˆ is impending.
` 33. In the lustrum presided over by Indra, the first year
bears the name of igvara; the second, of Bahudhanya. The
three following years, as measured by the motion of Jupiter,
are known as Pramithin, Vikrama, and Vysha?

84. The first and second are good years, and bring back

the Golden Age, as it were, amongst mankind. Evil is Pra-

* CL Davis, As. Res. III. p. 220. The word exces also means
.% degree,” but is here rendered by “ quarter,” according to Utpala, who
explains it by pda.

* R, in the printed text, flgerTeraity, as the Comm. has.

© This word Is constantly written faq in one BSS. of the Comm.
‘This in additien to the Var. Lert. The word is introduced into Tamil
in the form of vide.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 59] =====
57

m&thin, but Vikrama and Vysha bestow copiousness of food,
although at the same time they cause dangerous diseases.

85. The first year of the fourth lustrum, which they call
Citrabhanu, is excellent; the second, named Subhinu, is
middling ; it brings sickness, yet causes no mortality.

36. Then follows Tarana, which gives copious rain ; farther,
Parthiva, joyful, with the luxuriant growth of grain. The
fifth year, Vyaya, is held to be » happy one: love reigns
supreme, and festivities follow one another without interrup-
tion.

87. In the lustrum of Tvashtar, the first year is termed
Sarvajit, the second Sarvadhérin; on this follow Virodhin,
Vikpta, and Khara. Of these the second is suspicious, the
others are dangerous,

88. Then (in the lustrum allotted to Ahirbudhnya the years
are:) Nandana, Vijaya, Jaya, Manmatha, and Durmukha.
The first three in this lustrum are beneficent; Manmatha pro-
duces indifferent effects; the last year is very bad.

89. In the seventh lustram are Hemalambe ; farther Vilam
bin, Vikirin, and Qarvart ;* the fifth Jovian year in the cycle
is known by the name of Plava.

40. During the first year there will be a great many plagues
in the country and rains accompanied with much wind. In
the second year there will be but little corn and not much
rain ;3 the third will be very rich in terrors and rain; Plava,
finally, is beneficent, and gives plenty of rain.

41. In the lustrum ruled by the Vigve-Devas the first year
is called Cobhakyt,‘ the second Cubhakrt, the third Krodhin ;
the succeeding are Vigvdvasu and Paribhava.

* The Comm. follows a wholly different reading. See Var. Lect.

* The names of the years are as well masculine as neuter, because
ebda is promiscuously used in both genders. As to Carvart, our text
would admit alse a stem Carvarin. Utpela does not analyse WEUHY.
The Tamil form Is éfrveri.

WHAFTY is erroneously printed as if it were a compound.

* Utpela, according to the testimony of the copyisis or correcters of

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 60] =====
58
42. The first and second bring pleasure to the people; the

third many evils; the last two are indifferent, but in Para- -

bhava will be fires, distress owing to war and sickness, and
danger to Brahmans and kine.

48, 44. The first year in the ninth lustrum is Plavanga,
the second Kilaka; farther, Saumya, Sddhdrana, and, lastly,
Rodhakyt. Kilaka and Saumya bestow hail; Plavanga is
unfortunate for mankind, in many respects; Sadhdraya brings
litéle rain and plagues of the country. As to the fifth year,
Rodhakrt, the rain in it and the thriving of the crops will be
unequally divided.

45. In the tenth lustrum, which is sacred to Indra-Agni,
the first year has the name of Paridhdvin. Then comes
Pramfdin and Ananda; the following are Rakshasa and
Anala.

46. In ParidhAvin, the middle-country is ruined, the king
lost, the rain deficient, and fire shows its fury. In Pramidin
men are indolent ; there will be riots, and loss of red flowers
and seeds.

47. The following year makes all men rejoice. Both
BAkshasa and Anala bring damage; the former produces
sammer corn, the latter excites conflagrations and pesti-
lence.

48, In the eleventh lustrum are Pingala, Kalayukta, Sid-
dhirtha, Raudra, and Durmati. During the first year there
is excessively much rain, theft, asthma, cough, and shaking of
the jaws.

49, KAlayukta bas many evils, but in Siddhartha are many
good things. Reudra is declared to be very cruel und per-
nicious. Durmati brings, moderately, rain.

50. In the lustrum lorded over by Bhaga, the first year,
called Dundubhi, greatly promotes the growth of the grain.

seme MBS. of his commentary, prefers TYMTL, but according to other .
copyista, WYSE. The Tamil bas borrowed this and the following
name in the form of éubskirute and éebekirutu, consequently in inverse
order. .

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 61] =====
59

The following, termed Udgfrin,! is baneful to
whilst the rains during it will be unequally distributed.*

51. The third year is Raktakeha, in which there is danger
caused by mordacious animals, and sickness. The fourth,
Krodha, arouses much wrath, and depopulates kingdoms
through wars,

52. The last year of the last lustrum is: styled Kshaya.
This, the originator of manifold loss, causes danger to Brah-
mans, though it makes cultivators thrive, and augments the
profits of Vaigyas, CAdras, and thieves,

Herewith I have given, in a succinct form, the whole of
what is contained in the work, “the Cycle of Sixty Years.”

53. The planet Jupiter, when bristling with bright rays,
ehowing a large orb and the hue of the white lotus, of jessa-
mine or orystal, whilst moving on the right road,’ not over-
powered by another planet,‘ brings weal to mankind.§ ५

Ouarrer IX.
The Course of Venus. -

1. There are nine paths* (along which Venus moves),
namely, that of the “wild elephant,” “the elephant,” “the
celestial elephant,” “the bull,” “the cow,” “the old ox,”
“the deer,” “the goat,” and “fire.” Some state that these

) The Comm. bas WYTT for SATFC, most probably « clerical errer
(sce Var. Lect.). The Tamil bas urettiretkéri, which points to the
8०००४८7; रधिरोद्रारि

* Comm. विषमा । अतुच्छा । चतिषष्डा वा ।

* ie. in the north of the Nakshatras.

* To wit, in the grakeyuddhe. See ch. xvil. 9,

© WefU<y ie, of course, an erratum for feTeCY. -

* PUthi or ofthf is “an alley, a passage, a footpath.” It denotes as
well a parcel of a more extensive road (mérga), as a small, narrow road.
_ The translation attempts to mark the difference between ofthi and

mérge by using the terms “ path” and “ road.” 6 .

Digitized 7 Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 62] =====
a

60

paths extend, each of them, over three lunar mansions, to
begin with Acvint, and so on.'

2, 8. But (in our opinion) the wild elephant’s path includes
Sviti, Bharani, and Kyttikaé; the three following paths com-
prehend each three mansions, beginning with Rohint.* In
the cow’s path lie Acvini, Revati, and both Bhadrapadis;
in that of the old ox, Cravana, Dhanishtha, and Catabhishaj ;
in that of the deer, Anuridhé, Jyeshth4, and Mila; Hasta,
Vigikh&, and Citré make up the goat’s path; the two Ashé-
qhAs form that of fire.

‘This view is held by the authorities Devala and Kicyape. Comm.
ware Qaw:
eferarfefeor: oat arava ceferan: |
बीवयो मुमुपुषस्ठ ve What: पुरातनः ॥
It is evident that this statement and the whole work ascribed to Devala,

a Rehi ta the proper acceptation o/ the term, a superhuman being, can-
met have preceded Variba-mibira for a long period, since the first Na-

Kshatra ia the enumeration is Acvint. Moreover, the Words WIT:

3 are quite signifcant, though containing an inaccuracy, for the
“Ancients” could not have began with (रान, The same remark
“applies to the werk fathered upon Kicyapa, from which the fellewing is

~ चिष्यञ्चिन्धादिवु यदा रति भुगुनब्दनः।
नलागवीषोति खा चैवा प्रथमा "ग्वा निबोधत ॥
रोदिष्डादि मवा ज्या -दिल्वादैरावता शूता । .
मघावा चर्वमा चैवा इलाया गौः प्रकीर्तिता ५
जारदवी विद्याखाया मूलाथा मुगवीषिका।

अवीची विष्युमाया पूरवाया दहना शृता ॥

Remarkable is here the use of WHT, TUAT, WAT, etc., instead of
the’ derivatives, or of the compounds WWUYET, etc. Variba has imi-

tated thie in v. 3.
- © Consequently, Rohigt, Mrgeciras and Ardri form the Gajavitht;
Pesarvace, Pashya, and AclesbA the Alrtvatt vitht; Maghd, Pirva and
Uttara-Phelgual the Vrshabbavitld.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 63] =====
61

. 4, Of these, the first three are in the northern road ;. the
following three in the middle; the remaining three in the
southern road; and each of them occupies the northernmost,
middlemost, and southernmost part of each road.’

. ‘eg. the Nagar. is the northernmost in the Northern road; the Gajav.
the middlemost in it, and so forth. The anthor bas but partly followed

४. ४५००; तथाच पराशरः । अथ मानाखयो भवन्ति । खन्तरमथ्यम-
दविणाः। पुनरकैक्स्िधा नव वीचय दव्याचचते । तथोत्तरे wT
wart ae वमनोवरदनन्यो दचिथे मुनाजाग्निकाः (१.
ग्वरहनाः) । तासां नामा -“ग्नेययाम्यवायन्धानि । बववीषी रोहि-
wre Wife चत्वारि परभैरावती । आर्वमा फष्युग्दौ । गोवोषो
प्राक्पोहपदादोनि चलारि । TTF TTT RTH ATCT TTT
लाद्रहष्ठमानो । भेषमिद्धारै मारिका । एदं मूखमवाडा च San-
WU । एवमेवेच्छन्ति ॥ 1४७ authority closely followed by our anther
Ss Garga: AUT मर्गः ।

छृकिका मरी खाती नायवीची प्रकीर्तिता ।

शोहिष्ायास्िभाखिखो यनैरावतकार्वभाः 8

आहिरवुध्न्याशिपौष्डव गोवीधोहि प्रकीर्तिता ।

अयाचितं चैवा वीची वारद्ववोतिखा॥ -

भैचाचिमा मुगास्ला स्वाद्स्चिचाविशाखिकाः ।

अववीधी तु दहना " वाडायुग्ममिति दुता ॥

Wiens werd गववीवी तदुत्तरा। `

Torah तुतीया स्यादेताणु्तरतः ख्जिताः ॥

आ्देभी च चतुरं खाद्रोवीषी पञ्चमी खयृता ।

बषटी जारदवी चया तिखस्ला मष्यमाभिताः ॥

खक्तमी मुगवीधी स्ादववीथी तवामी ।

दहना गवमो जेया ददिष arden:

This statement of Garga disagrees with another ascribed to him, and
given bere below. .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 64] =====
62

5. Others say that the paths and roads are north, middle,
or south, according as the junction stars of the mansions are
in the north, middle, or south of the girdle of asterisms.

6. Some others again? define the roads in this way: the
northern road commences with Bharani (and goes to Maghd
included); the middle road begins with Pdrva-Phalgunt ;
the southern road extends from Pirva-AshAdha (to the end
of Agvint). .

7. (But enough); the science of stars is founded upon tra-
dition, and where the authorities disagree it does not become
us to make our own choice either way. My task is to men-
tion the different opinions.

8. The planet Venus setting or rising in the northern
peths, produces abundance of food and happiness; in the
middle paths, it has indifferent effects; in the southern ones,

_ it has > miserable influence.

9. One may state the effects to be very excellent, excellent,
a little lees, indifferently good, middling, less than this, bad,
miserable, and utterly miserable, in the northern paths, and
#0 on, in succession

10. The first division (of the cluster of Nakshatras) con-
gjsts of the four mansions, Bharap!, Kyttika, Rohint, und
Mygagiras. It* brings abundance, but causes terror in the
countries of Vangs, Angs, Mahishs, Bahlika, and Kalinga.

" 0००० तथाच र्गः ।

अश्चयुम्बोयपर्वने " वाडादौ वके गवे। -

where: सदा क्रूरो दधिषे पथि वर्तते ॥

शुको निछंतिपर्यन्ते माम्बादौ गवे मदे ।

अतेमागखच मध्वो मध्यमे पथि वर्तते ॥

भरश्छादौ मघान्ते च FMV was AB

बर्तमानः मुभो चेय खरे पथि वर्तते ॥
‘There isa considerable discrepancy between this passage of Gargn’s and
the one quoted immediately before. The word HW@ in the second
stanza means “ indifferent, neuter, neither good nor bad.”

9 ‘This is a very elliptical way of speaking for “ the planet standing
im this division.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 65] =====
63

11. If another planet overtakes! Venus after the latter has
risen in this division, it will destroy the kings of the Bhadri-
¢vas,* Cirasenas, Yaudheyas, and of Kotivarsha.

12. The second division is made up of Ardra, Punarvasu, '
Pushya, and Aglesha; it brings immense rain and good crops ;
to Brahmans, especially to such as are cruel-minded, it is
disastrous.

18. When Venus is assailed? in it by another planet, dis-
tress presses the barbarians, savages, ho: possessors `
of kine, the Gonardas, proletaries, Cidras, and Videhas.

14, The planet if rising in Magh&, Parva-Phalgunt, Uttara-
Phalgunt, Hasta, or Citra (forming the third division), causes
the loss of the crops, danger of famine, and robbery, the rise
in rank of low-born people, and confusion of the different
classes of society.

15. The same being checked‘ in Maghf, etc., by another
planet, strikes the shepherds, Cabara-savages, (idras, (bar-
barous) Pundras, the savages of the western marches, the

" ८५०७; अन्धो यह आरोहेदुपरि पतेत्‌ । अयतखिष्ठतीवर्ः ।
* The Bhadricvas are a mythical people, fabled to live in the remote
East, or, according to the phrase of the astronomical Siddhiatas, at
90°. from Lanks, in the region where Yavakoti, “Java Polat,” is
alteated. (The r. Yamekefi is erroneous, for Yama’s kingdom Is in the
Bouth, net in the Kast; and, besides, the compound Yamakoti le develd
of sense.) The origin of the Bhadricvas dwelling near the Udayagici
may be traced, I think, to Rgveda, 1. 115, 2, seg.

सूरयो देवीमुषसं रोचमानां मयां न योवामग्वेति पञ्चात्‌ ।

चथा गरो देवयन्तो युगानि बितन्वते प्रति भद्रा भद्रम्‌ ॥

भद्रा अचा हरितः सूर्य्य चिभा एतन्धा अगुमायाखः।

warerelt दिव आ पुमः परि खावापुचिवी चन्ति सथः ॥

_* The term dkremate—jumpe up against, asealls, attacks, over-
powers ”—Is synonymous with éreheti (v. 11), “jumps upon, overtakes.”
* doash{ebdha is another synouym to dkrdate and éréghe.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 66] =====
64

Sdlikas,' the inhabitants of the Vanavasin district,? the Dra-
vidas and coasters.’

16. The three mansions, Svati, Vigdkha, and Anurddhé,
form the fourth division, which causes no danger, promotes
abundance and prosperity amongst the nobility, but, at the
eame time, dissensions betwixt friends.

17. The planet, when assailed in it, is deadly to the chief-
tain of the Kirdtas, and crushes the Ikshvakus, the savage
border tribes,‘ the Avantis, Pulindas, Tanganas, and Cira-
senas.

18. The five lunar asterisms, Jyeshthé, Mile, Pdrva-
Ashidbé, Uttara-Ashidhé, and Qravana (which makes the
fifth division), bring famine, robbers, and sickness, and annoy
the Kashmirians, Acmakas, Matsyas, Avantis, and those that
dwell along the banks of the Carudevt.

19. In case of Venus being overtaken in this division, the
Abhbiras, Dravides, Ambeshthas, Trigartiane, Surashtrians,
and Sindhu-Suviras are ruined, and the lord of Kaci-country
will be killed. .

20. The sixth division consists of the six Nakshatras,
Dhanishthd, Catabhishaj, Pdrva-Bhadrapadd, Uttara-Bhad-
rapada, Revatt, and Agvint; it is a lucky one, rich in corn,
feeming with wealth and flocks of cows, though, here and
there, it is not exempt from perils.

21. Should Venus be overtaken in it, then the Sflikas,
Gandharians, and Avantis get afflicted, the King of Videha

1 This seems to bo the preferable spelling.

® Utpala takes WOUTEUH: here eppeliativd, ns WRATT:; but this
being a general term would include all tribes living in forests, couse-
quently the Cabaras toe, Cf. ch. xiv. 12; MabAbb. il. 31, 60; Lassen,
Ind. Ak. vol. iil, p. 185 and 279.

* श्र the ०८००००९१ खागुद्धाः खमुद्धतीरवासिनः. 8००० सामुद्रा
means meritimt, the word certalaly may denote the coasters, but here
we have rather te think of the islanders of the ocean. Cf, Mahibb.
i 31, 68.

° एष : अ्रज्यन्ला ACUTE: |

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 67] =====
65

is killed; the forest tribes of the Borders, the Yavanas,
Scythians, and servants! flourish

The fourth and fifth divisions are happy in the west;
the third division is so in the east. The remaining have
such results as are mentioned abeve.*

23, Hesperus, when visible before sunset, bodes unsafety ;
when visible the whole day, famine and diseases; when seen
with the moon at noon, he brings discord between the royal
troops and the city?

24. When the planet goes through the midst‘ of the
Pleiads, then the earth will be equally covered by the
streams, whose water-masses step out of the banks, so that
heights and depths on her surface are no more discernible.

25. When Rohint’s Wain! is cleft (by Venus), the earth,
being chequered with hairs and pieces of bones (of the slain

" ९०००. दाषः कर्मकराः.

* Le. the rising of the planet Im the fourth or fifth division briags
lock to the Western regions. With Paricara the six divisleas are
५००० आद, रोहित, दारय, विरोचन, उध्यदष्ड, तीर. .

* The Comm. understands it to bo discord between the king, the
army, and the city. *

५ शरन term cheds, “cleaving, going through,” might, if we had te de
with its acceptation in scientific Hindu astrocomy, be rendered by
“occultation.” See below, v. 28.

* The Waln of Rohint is cleft, i.e. andergoes occultation by « planet,
when the latter, standing in the 17th degree of Taurus, bas a southern
latitude (vikshepa) of a little more than two degrees. Thus in Sirya 8.
8, 13, and in the two following passages, ene from Brahmagupta, the
other from Bbinubhatta—

तथाच ब्रह्मधिद्ानते।

विचेपो - अद्धितयादधिको बुषभेस्छ खप्तदशमाभे।
य ग्रहस्छ चाम्बो मिनन्ति अकरं ख रोहिखाः ॥
तथाच भागुभडुः।

Feet cred षिकेपो यस्व दथिवः।

अंद्रदणाधिको भिण्वाद्रोहिष्ाः अकरं तु खः. ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 68] =====
66

in battles), performs, as it were, the penance of “ wearing
skalls,” as though she had committed sin.! °

26. Venus, at reaching Mrgaciras, is said to be pernicious
to essences and grain; by standing in Ardré, the planet hurts
the Kogalas and Kalingas, and gives plenty of rain.

27. When the same stands in Punarvasu, the Acmakas
and Vidarbhss suffer great distress; when in Pushya, there
is copious rain, and warfare betwixt the hosts of the in-
habitants of Fairyland.

28. Venus, moving in Aclesh&, makes men suffer horribly
from serpents. By cleaving the star Maghé,? the same is

* This stanza of our author's Is cited in the Pancatantra (\. st. 239),

and that in a corrupt form.
" ® The Vidyidbaras are more especially the “ wise” elves of Tentonic
mythology ; etymologically, the elves, Icel. Alfar (the Gothic form of
which cannot be Albés, as Grimm supposes in D. Myth. p. 248, but
must have been dlbjus, sing. Albus), are the Skr. Rubus, a word that
Tikewise means “clever, skilful.” King Alfred the Great, or, as the North-
men called him, Elfrtdr bine Rtki, rightly bore his name, “having the
wisdom of an elf.”

* Utpala gives in a quotation the defiaition of the cleaving, alias
eceultation, of the junction star of Maghs by a planet: Rawrwet Afq-
wanton!

wiguft drrct armiferfarafatare
। स्फ़टविचेपो चष्ाधिकोगको भवति safe: ॥
0111 11 21
the scientific astronomers, as follows:” “A planet occults the junction
star of Magh& (Regulus) whea its own rectifed latitude, being in the
some direction (north), is more than half the latitude, and less than one
and o half the latitude of the star.” From this we may deduce that
the anther of the stanza, whoever he may have beea (probably Brahma-
gepta), bad « still more accurate knowledge of the real latitade of
Regulus than the Sirya 8. bas, in which the latitude is stated to be 0.
Another stanza defines the latitude of the Mooa when causing the occult-
ation of certain stars:

विपे ° कवे सौम्ये तुतोचतारां भिनत्ति पिच्च |
इण्डुर्भिगति पुषं पौष्यं वादयमविचिपतः ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 69] =====
67

mischievous to the great treasurers (akias, prime ministers),
but bestows much rain.

29. In POrva-Phalgunt the planet annihilates the savage
Qabaras and Pulindas, and promotes the fall of rain; in
Uttara-Phalgunt it brings rain and strikes the inhabitants
of Kuru-field and Pancdla.

30, 31. By Venus standing in Hasta, the Kuros and
painters suffer, and the rain is prevented from falling;
in Citra, affliction comes to diggers of wells and to birds,
but there will be a fine rain; in Svati the rain will be plenti-
ful, and distress reigns amongst messengers, merchants, and
akippers; in Vigdkhé also the planet gives nice rain, though
merchants, to be sure, incur peril.

32, The planet, when in Anurddhd, occasions strife be-
tween the potentates; in Jyeshtha, grief to great monarchs;
in Mila, to druggists and physicians; in all three there is
drought.

33. In Pdrva-Ashddhé, aquatic animals are vexed; in
Uttara-Ashadhé, diseases rage; in Qravana, sickness of the
ear prevails; in Dhanishtha, danger awaits the infidels."

34. In Qatabhishaj, Hesperus afflicts distillers; in Pirva-
Bhadrapada, gamblers from profession, as well as the Kuru- -
Pancflas; at the same time he brings rain.

85. The same, when in Uttara-Bhadrapada,* damages fruits
and roots, and, when in Revatt, such kings as are to under-
take a campaign; when in Acvint, horse-keepers; and, in
Bharay!, the Kirdtas and Yavanas.* .

“The Moon occults the third star of Magh& when she has her greatest
latitude north; 00 she does Pushya, Revati, and Catabhishaj, when she
bas no latitude.” From this we must conclude that the third star of the
mansion Maghi is » Leonis.

1 To understand the quibble, we must bear in mind that another name
of Dbanishtbh is Cravishthé, and that Bauddhas are (rivakes. Cf.
eb. vill. 12, .

. * In the printed text WfgS Is an erratam for Wifye.

* We see that mot onlyin the Ramfyapa the word Yavana is quibbled

‘upon by being connected with WYf, for WT Is synqnymoas with, or
1 6 .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 70] =====
68

86. When Venus becomes visible, or sets on the 14th,

16th, or Sth of the dark half of the month, then the earth
resembles one sea of water.

87. When Venus and Jupiter stand, one in the west, the
other in the east, in the seventh asterism (alias, at six signs
distance) from each other,! then the people, oppressed with
sickness, unsafety, and grief, look in vain for rain from the
Rain-god.

88. When Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, and Saturn move, all
of them, before: Venus, then arise conflicts among men,
dragons, and the inhabitants of Fairyland, and storms caus-
ing the downfall of all that is high.

89. Friends will be fickle in their friendship; Brahmans
do not duly attend to their work; and not the slightest rain
is granted by the Thunderer, who, with his thunderbolt,
cleaves the tops of the mountains.

40. At Saturn advancing before Venus, the barbarians,
cats, elephants, asses, buffalos, dark sorts of grain, hogs,
Pulinda-savages, Cidras and inhabitants of the Dekkhan,
perish by outbreak of ophthalmia and rheumatic

41. Venus preceding Saturn, destroys the people by fire,
the sword, famine, drought, and robbers, and hurts mov-
able and immovable things in this world, and the northern
country, and the space around by fire, lightning, and dust.

42. The same staying behind Jupiter, ruins everythin,
white, Brahmans, cows, temples, and the East; the clouds
pour showers of hailstones; diseases of the throat prevail;
but the autumnal corn will be plentiful.

48. Mercury standing before Venus, at rising or setting,
beings rain, and cocasions different kinds of jaundice of

at least figured by, UIf4. That Taft once must have been a common
werd fer womb may be safely inferred from the fact that WC really
occurs as partus, gestatio, Rgveda, x. 31, 6.

* The author “intimates herewith,” says Utpela, “that one of them
mst be on the eastern, the ether on the western horizoa”"—RANeYl-

wef चथोदवाखमव शवादक्मणोर्ं योग इति । eet |

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 71] =====
69

bilious origin,’ promotes the growth of summer corn, is
deadly to monks, keepers of sacrificial fire, physicians, stage
performers, horses, Vaigyas, cows, kings along with their
vehicles, to yellow things, and the West.

. 44. When Hesperus is red, like fire, there is danger of
fire; when blood-red, the sword will rage; when pale, like
a gold line on a touchstone, diseases reign; when greenish
yellow or russet, asthma and cough rage; when ashy, coarse,
or dusty in appearance, no water falls from heaven.

45. But when the brightest of planets shows the hue of
ourdled milk, the white water-lily, or the moon, has distinct
‘and far expanding rays, and a large orb, occupies a favour-
able position amid the stars, is free from unnatural signs and
victorious,* then it brings about a state of things similar to
that in the Golden Age.

Cuarrer X.
Saturn's Course.

1, Inctaying in Qravane, Sviti, Hasta, Ardra, Bharant, and
Parva-Phalgunf, Saturn, if bright, makes the earth to be
covered with plenty of water.

2. The same, standing in AgleshA, Catabhishaj, and Jye-
shtha, brings safety, but no abundant rain; in Mils, he
brings famine, the sword, and drought. I will also state the
effects (of Saturn) in each mansion separately.

8. By moving in Agvint, Saturn destroys horses, grooms, _
poets, physicians, and kings’ counsellors; by moving in
Bharapt, dancers, musicians, singers, outcasts, and reprobates.

4. At Saturn standing in Kyttiké, such as are dependent
upon fire in ‘their profession (emiths, etc.) and generals

1 The vr. WHET W le wrong’; r. WIAUTY with the Comm., or, as
some 488. ४०१९, कामजा `

5 A planet le styled “ victorious” when It shows the signs enamerated
in ch. xvii, 10. , 2 `

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 72] =====
70

euffer; 00 do the Kosalas, Madras, Kacis, Pancilas, and
‘waggoners during the planet’s stay in Rohint.
5, 6. The Vateas, sacrificers, their employers, noblemen,

and the inhabitants of the Middle-country suffer, when Saturn _

is moving in Mrgaciras; likewise the Paratas, Ramathas, oil-
millers, bleachers, and thieves, during the planct’s stay in
Ardr&; 20 do the Panjabees, the inhabitants of the Western
Marches, Surashtrians and Sindhu-Sauviras, when Saturn
stands in Punarvasu; and when in Pushya, bell-ringers,
publio criers, Yavanas, merchants, gamblers, and flowers.

7, 8. The planet’s motion in Aglesh& causes affliction to
aquatic animals or products, and snakes; in Magha, to the
Bahltkas, Chinese, Gandharians, Silikas, Paratas, Vaicyas,
to storehouses and merchants; in Parva-Phalgunt, to vendors
of liquors,' women of the town, dameels, and the Mahrattees ;
in Uttara-Phalgun!, to kings, sugar, salt, mendicant friars,
water, and the district of Takshagilé.

9. By the planet standing in Hasta, barbers, potters (or
cil-millers), thieves, physicians, tailors, elephant catchers,
harlots, the Kausalakas, and makers of garlands are afflicted.

10. When Saturn is staying in Citra, the same occurs to
women, writers, painters, and variegated vessels ;* when in
Sviti, to bards, spies, envoys, equerries,’ shippers, mimics,
and such-like people.

11. By the planct’s stay in Vicikhé, the Trigartians,
न eaffron, lac, corn, madder, and safflower are

12. When the planet stands in Anurddhi, the Kulfitas,

Kashmirians, along with kings’ counsellors, 1
* and bell- come to and discord arises
ए ringers, grief, be-

* Utpala differentiy: CST: WE WY WATT TAT: |
इषां विकथिवः।

° ८५०; चिकिचाखि नानाभाष्डायि। वङवणानीतर्थः।

* SRT: are, sccording to the Comm., BTCWY: GATATERT वा
they combine, however, beth qualifications.

4 Otherwise 9० 05०9. चक्रचरः कुदकारप्रमुतिभिः।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 73] =====
71

18. Kings, priests, men honoured by kings, heroes, asso `
ciations, families, and guilds come to grief by Saturn stand-
ing in Jyeehth&; eo do the Karis, Kosalas, Pancilas, fruite,
herbs, and soldiers, by his stay in Mala. .

14. When the planet is moving in Parva-AshAghi, the
Angas, Vangas, Kausalas, Magadhes, Pupdras, Mithilas, the
inhabitants of the district of Girivraja and Tamalipté come
to grief.

15, 16. Saturn moving in Uttara-AshAdhé, destroys the
Dacarpas, Yavanas, Ujjain, the Qabaras, the mountaineers of
Pariyatra, and the Kuntibhojas; in Qravana, judges, eminent
Brahmans, physicians, chaplains, and the Kalingss. When
the planet stands in Dhanishtha, the king of Magsdh& con-
quers, and treasurers thrive.

17. During the planet’s remaining in Qatabhishej and
Pirva-Bhadrapada, eome among the physicians, poets, dis-
tillers, traders, and politicians are distressed; 00 are rivers,
cartwrights, women, and gold, by Saturn moving in Uttara-
Bhadrapad’. .

18, When Saturn is moving in Revatt, persons maintained
by kings, the inhabitants of Kraunca-dvipe, the autumnal
corn, Qabaras and Yavanas are crushed.

19. When Jupiter is moving in Vigikh&, while Saturn
stands in Krttikd, then most horrible calamity befalls the
people ; when both planets are staying in one mansion, there
will be civil feud. .

20. Tf Saturn is variégated, he destroys the birds; if yellow,
he causes danger of famine ; if blood-red, he threatens danger
of the sword; and if ashy-coloured, he oocasions many
quarrels, ,

21. If he is spotless bright, showing the lustre of the
beryl, he brings good to the people. He is aleo auspicious
if showing the hue of the blue -Barleria and flax-flower.
Agrecably to the statements of the Seers, Saturn is destructive
to the members of such and such a caste, the colour of which
he happens to assume."

. } ‘yay in the printed text le an erratam for WHY.
® In the text WUTfY Is an error for WHTFY. 53

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 74] =====
Cnarrzz XI.
The Course of Comets.

. 1, After s previous study of the Course of Comets by
Garga, Paricara, Asita-Devala, and many other authorities,!

I undertake now to treat this subject in such a way as to |

remove perplexity.

2. The rising or setting of comets cannot be known by
astronomical rule, as there are three different kinds of them
celestial, atmospheric, and terrestrial

3. Anything which, without fire, has an igneous appear-
‘ance, is a species of blazing star, except glow-worms, meteors
on the graves,’ gems, jewels, and the like.*

4. Atmospheric lights are such as are(occasionally observed)
on banners, swords, dwellings, trees, horses, elephants; celestial
ones are seen among the asterisms. Such as do not belong to
these two descriptions are terrestrial Ketus. -

5. Some estate that there are 101 comets; others, that there
are 1,000; the Seer Narada declares there is only one comet,
which assumes different shapes.

6. What does it matter, whether there is but one or more?

* Theeo are, according to Utpala, Kacyapa, Rshiputra, Narada, Vajra,
ete. From Vajra very little Is known. I surmise that it is synonymous
with Paricara (cf, Atharva V. 6, 65, 1) and Garga (see footnote at ch. 1. 3).

* The term pichellaye Is, to my knowledge, nowhere explained. As
the Picheas are supposed to have their favourite abodes in the ceme-
teries, I think that phosphorical phenomena so common in burial
greunds are so termed.

* From this definition it appears that the term kets admits of no exact
rendering ; generally it denotes “comets,” but the terrestrial and atmo-
spheric ketus are most likely phosphoric and electric phenomena, as
well as falling stars and gaseous lights in morasecs. I cannot forbear
Fecalling to the memory of the reader the lines in Byron’s “ Manfred”:
™ When the meon is on the wave,” ete.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 75] =====
78

The effects, though, should at all events be told, along with
their rising, setting, place, contact, hazy covering and colour.

7. The number of months wherein the comets show their
influenoo is equal to the number of days during which they
are visible; in the same manner the number of years corre-
- sponds to that of months. The effects begin to take place
after forty-five days.!

8. A comet which is short, small, serene, glossy, not crocked,
white, and appearing but for « short time, or only perceived
just rising,* brings abundance and happiness. -

9. If a comet shows an appearance the reverse of the fore- न
mentioned, it is not auspicious, especially if it resembles a
rainbow, or has two or three crests. `

10. Twenty-five comets with crests, and भूपयणडु [क 9
necklace of pearls, jewels or gold, are termed “the Kiranas.”
They are visible in the eastern and western region,‘ and oo-
casion quarrels amongst sovereigns, They are the offspring
of the Sun.

. 11. Even as many stars resembling in colour to parrots,
fire, the Dophariya-flower, lao or blood, are visible in the
south-west, boding danger of fire. They are the sons of Fire.

12, As many others, with crooked crests, and rough and

1 The Comm. confesses that the statement Is not,very clear
wRrgerart गोन नियामकममभिलिख्ति । वि,
` चावन्तमहानि इशः खात्‌ तावश्यासान्‌ फलं मवेत्‌ । `
मासासु यावहुश्धेत तावमो -ष्दाख्ु धैढठताः ४
चिपथात्परतः कम पश्यते "द्व मुमामुमम्‌। `
खच्छमुदिते केतौ फलं नेहादिशेहुधः॥ . `
" ८० ग-अमिवृट, ०० ८०० इमा चदि बुषधियैववि।

* Le. im common parlance, “tail.” ” .
"© Utpala remarks that the whole number of them le not visible at the
same time, but each of them separately. This rule is of general appli-
०८००५ एतेषां मध्वादेक एव इते । ग सवे सुगपदिति सर्वतेवं परि. -
भावा। -. nO

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 76] =====
14 .
dark, appear in the south. Being the sons of Death, they

_ pearance

Prsible in the north-esst, are the children of Earth, and
threaten with famine. .

_ _ 14, Threo comets shining like to moon-light, silver, hoar-
frost, the white lotus or jessamine, show themeelves in the
north. They are the sons of the Moon, and bring plenty.

15. There is a single comet, with three crests and three
colours, the offspring of the Creator. Know that this star,
which may rise in any quarter, is called “ Brahma’s rod,”
and foretells the end of the world.

16. Herewith are enumerated the 101 comets! I shall
ow proceed to indioate the tokens by which the 899 (other)
comets may be clearly recognized.

17. In the north and north-east rise the so-called eighty-
four comets, the sons of Hesperus. They show large and
white stars, a soft brillisncy, and produce hard effects.

` ४ ष ०० अ ष ध ०० difers
+ ०.०2; तथाच पराञचरः। यतमे जेतून। भवन्त । तेवा बोर

aga Teer CENT ENAT EH TINEA TTT TTT

wx Qeraer: wage Wee Teee TT सप्तदश मरोचिकश्षप- .

WETTAT: पञ्चच प्रजापतिहासजाः । अथो विमावमुमुताः । धूमो-
इषः । चतुरेच ममान “गुते लोभेन Se CRT | THT IE
जोपनः। इति ॥ ‘The Rabi Avddilika le only another form of Uddt-
Ina, foc a mythology father and oon, U2. the earilor and later Phan
of the same phonemscsen, get naterally confounded. Qreta-kets, “the
ies comet,” the well-known fabled tenther in the Upanishads snd
“JDethmages, 1, 00 the name by Itself clearly shows, & star, end not ®
mes. Cl v. 87 below. ~

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 77] =====
न Lntmagh ala

 

 

 

 

7

19. The “hairless” comets, the offspring of Jupiter, have
no crest, and one bright nucleus. These, sixty-five in number,
are fulgent, appear in the south, and are of evil augury.

20. The fifty-one, named the “ Thieves,” sons of Mercury,
are faint, not very clear, long and white; they may rise-in
any direction, and produce evil effects.

21. Ill-omened, too, are the children of Mars, sixty in
number, who look like blood or fire, and show three crests
and three kernels. These, styled the “Saffron-coloured ”

" comets, are visible in the north.
. 22. The thirty-three eons of R&hu, nominated the “Opa-

cous wedges,” show themselves on the disk of san and moon.
What they presage, has been told in the chapter headed—
The Sun's Course.

23. A hundred-and-twenty others, called the “Omniform”
comets, are the offspring of Fire. They are enwrapt in a
Dlasing circle, and occasion dreadful fires.

24. Seventy-seven comets, of dark red hue, without a
nucleus, with diffuse rays, and in the shape of chowries,
are the sons of Air. These, known by the appellation of

‘the “Red,” are rough in appearance, and bring evil.

25. Eight other comets, named the “Heap,” because re- .
sembling a cluster of stars, are children of the Creator. The

204, called the equare comets, are likewise his offspring.*

26. Thirty-two, eons of Varuna, termed the ‘ Herons,”
have the shape of a bamboo or shrub. These, brilliant as
the monn, -are said fo have cruel effects.

27. Ninety-six, styled the “Trunks,” as bearing the shape
of headless bodies, are children of Time. These comets, whose
nucleus lacks distinctness, are malign and dreadful.*

28, The nine comets, rising in the nine quarters, show one
bright and great star. So much for the general description
of the thousand comets; I shall néw enter into detaile.

) ch, ill. 7.

„ * It fe to be understood, as the scholiast adds, that these have an evil

५६००००७; पापा एव शाः । ति चाजेवदिकखस्मनाः

* Utpala follows another reading (see Var. Lect.) and explains accerd-
ingly, “bring safety to the Pupdras.'

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 78] =====
76

29. The Fat comet rises in the west, stretching far to the
northward ; is large and of glossy appearance. It causes
instant mortality, yet egregious abundance too.

30. The Bone comet, having the same characteristics, save

that it is rough, is said to bring frightful famine. Another, ~

known as the Sword comet, having the same appearance,
except that it is smooth, and rises in the east, occasions
affrays and pestilence.

31. The Skull comet, with purple-tinged rays and crest,
becomes visible at the day of new moon, in the east, and
extends its course through half the heavens; it causes famine,
mortality, drought, and sickness.

32, The comet of Rudra rises in the east, on the path of
Fire,' with a crest in the shape of a trident, and with a
blackish, rough or red glare. It extends its course over a
third part of heaven, and has the same effects as the former.

33. In the weet rises the Movable comet, whose crest is
an inch high, and turned to the south. It is steadily in-
creasing in length the more it prcceeds to the north.

34. As it has come near the asterism of the Great Bear,
the pole-star and Abhijit (Vega), it goes back, and having
moved through half the firmament, sets in the south. -

35. It will destroy the country from Praydga, on the
Ganges, as far as Ujjain and Pushkardranya,* and north-

wards up to the river Devika, along with the greatest part

of the middle country.

36. Some parte of other countries, too, will be stricken
by diseases and famine. Its influence will be felt for ten
months, or, according to others, for eighteen.

87. The White comet will be visible in the east, at mid-
night, with a crest pointing to the south, and another, named
Ka,* resembling yoke, in the west. Both will be seen at
the same time, during seven days. .

1 In the printed text r., of course, QTE. As to the path of Fire,
ef. ch. tx. 8.

* The erratam in the text needs scarcely to be pointed oat.

® Ia Partcara ie added, “Ka, the eon of the Creator,” %: Wai:

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 79] =====
=

7 .

38. Both bring plenty and luck, if they be smooth. Should
Ka be seen for a longer period, then he bodes distress from
the fury of the sword during ten years.

39. When the White comet resembles a tuft of hair, is
rough and darkish, and when, after moving through a third
part of the firmament, it retrogrades from right to left,! then
it destroys two-thirds of the population.

40. A hairy star with purple-tinged crest, becoming visible
near the Pleiads, is known as the Radiant comet. It has the
eame effects as the last-mentioned.

41, The Dhruva-ketu* has no determined course, dimen-
sion, colour, or form, and may appear in any direction, as
well in the heavens as in the sky, or on the earth. If
fulgent, it has agreeable results.

42, But the princes on whose warlike equipments, the
countries on whose dwellings, trees, and hills, and the house-
holders on whose implements this luminary is seen, are doomed
to destruction. — .

48, The comet termed the Water-lily, as bearing the hue
of that flower, appears for one night in the west, with its

crest tending to the east. It brings surely uncommon sbun- *

dance throughout ten years.
44. The Gem comet, visible but once, for the space of one.

Ufergw:, and Gvote-keta bears the surname of ०००००; थाच
पराध्रः। अथोदालकश्चेतकेतुदं शोर वर्थश्तं मोष्य भरकेतोखारान्ते
पू्वस्वां दिशि दचिणाभिनतथिखठो -धराचकान्त gar: 1 tre ay
दितीयः कः प्रणापतिपुषः पञिमेन यहकेतुयुपदंष्डायी युगपदुश्ेत 1.
ततस्वावुभोौ सहराषदृश्यौ दच्च वषा प्रजाः पीडयतः ॥ CL v.16.

` ए, : खपलग्दम्‌ WHE ATS । वामनमाजे विनिवृत्तिं करोति।

* The rendering would be.“ the firm, fixed comet,” but this does not
agree with the description. I¢ may be supposed our author followed a
corrapt reading, for Paricara calls this comet Dhima-ketu.

* ५० ‹ सेनाङ्गेष्यश्चोपकरदेषु शलीनपयालादिषु, This defsl-
tion seems too narrow, since horses and elephants themselves are
reckoned to belong to the QuryrifW. Cf Amara-kosbe, ll. 8,2, 1: -

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 80] =====
78

watch, in the west, has an extremely faint nucleus; its orest
is right and white, like « drop of milk from » woman's breast.

45. At rising it brings abundance for four months and a
half. Sometimes, however, it gives rise also to the prevalence
of noxious animals,

46. The Wator comet appears likewise in the west; it looks
gloesy, and wears its crest erected in a westerly direction,
It produces for nine months plenty and tranquillity among
mankind. ,

47. The Bhava-ketu, showing « faint nucleus, and shed-
ding « soft lustre, is visible for one night in the east. Its ~
crest, turned to the right, is like a lion’s tail.

48. One may predict uncommon abundance during a
number of months, corresponding to that of hours for which
the star continues visible. In case the comet looks rough,
one may expect deadly diseases.

49. The Lotus comet, white, like the fibre of the nymphwa,
will be seen for one night in the west; it brings plenty and
Joy during seven years.

50. The comet styled Avarta rises in tho west, at ‘mid-
night, shining bright, red-coloured, and with ita crest turned
southward.! The abundance caused by it lasts as many
months as is the number of hours the star is visible.

51. “Another, styled Samvarta, bears a purple red crest,
and shows itself st twilight, in the weat. After percurring
® third pert of the heavens, this horrible comet makes 5
stand, showing a crest in the shape of a trident,

52, Throughout s number of years, equal to that of hours
it ‘is visible, it will slay monarchs by the sword, and vex the
asterism in which it rises.*

58. Now I shall sot forth which kings are killed, if an
asteriam is touched or wrapped in hase by any other but au-
ध 54, A malign comet in Agvint will strike the ruler of the

- * ०००० सन्ध्रिखो दचिददिनाभितः।
व * The consequence of which is that those who stand under the in-
Minence of the particular asteriom will euffer ot the same time,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 81] =====
28

Agmakas; in Bharapt, of ४० पत; 7 Krttik, the
sovereign of Kalinga; in Rohint, the chieftain of the Cira-
senas.

55, 56. Such a one in Mrgaciras, destroys the king of
the Uginaras; in Ardrd, the chief of the Fishermen;! in
Punarvasu, the lord of the Acmakas; in Pushya, the go-
vernor of Magadh&; in AgleshA, the lord of the Asikas; in

MaghA, the king of Anga; in Pdrva-Phslgunt, the sove- -

reign of Pandya; in Uttara-Phalgunt, the king of Ujjain;
and in Hasta, the chief of the Dandaka district.

57. When s conict hurts Citré, those who are well up in
the lore may predict the death of the ruler of Kuru-field.
* The kings of the Kashmirians and Kambojas are annihilated,
in case an evil comet stands in Svati. , ॥

58. If such a one stays in Vichkhi, the sovereigns of the
Ikshvakus and of AlakA* are killed; if in AnuridhA, the
Pundra chieftain ; and if in JyeshthA, the emperor is alain.

59, 60. Through an evil comet in Mila, the king of An-
dhra, as well as he of the Madrakas, finds his death; by one
in Parva-Ashidha, the potentate of Kaci. One in Uttara-

Ashadha, will kill the monarchs of the Yaudheyas, Arjuni- -

yanas, Cibis, and Cedis; in Qravags and the five following,
successively, the chief of Kekaya, the Panjab, Ceilon, Vanga,
the Nimisha district and Kiritas. वि .
61. A comet whose orest, is touched by # meteor is auspi-
cious; still more auspicious one at whose sppearance rain
' falls,’ although it bodes ill luck to the Colas, Afghans, white
Huns, and Chinese.
‘62, Countries lying in the direction where the crest of s

> Utpala places them in the ६००५: प्रागदेश्यवासिन इद्धः ।

* The r. of the Comm. CITECMSATEY, inceutiously rejected by
the editor, seems preferable. It is passingly strange to find an Alaka
mentioned as if it were different from Alak& ruled by Kabera, bet »
people of the name of Ralaka is as yet wholly unknown. ‘The scholinst
says only: WORTH MATT TTT I :

© The scboliact 1. WWTEE:, and explains यमतप, इदितमाच `

TWH UU: “jest soon at rising.”

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 82] =====
comet is bent or pointing to, and those whose presiding as-
terism is touched by a comet, are struck down by heaven’s
power. When a monarch attacks them, he will take posses-

sion of the goods of hostile kings, like the eagle preys upon ©

the coils of the snakes, his enemies.

Onarrzr XII.
The Course of Agastya (Canopus).

[Succinctly is here treated the course of the Seer Agastya,!
the purifier of the waters, him who checked the Vindhya
mountain in rearing its head as a hindrance to the Sun’s
course; him who devoured the demon Vatapi, that had split
the loins of many Seers; him, the ocean of purity, by whom
the ocean was swallowed* and the southern quarter adorned.]
~ 1. It is he who, in the days of yore, at once heightened

the splendour of the ocean, by causing the water to-vanish: .

the rocky peaks, scooped out by the claws of sea-monsters,
were no longer covered with waves, but with a rolling tide

of the choicest gems and jewels, blended with dropping .

pearls, as if to abash the gods.with their bright jewelled
crowns.

- 2 It is he who increased the magnificence of the sea,
although he bereft her of the water, since the treeless cliffs
showed coral-trees, precious stoncs, and jewels, and glittering
gakes coming forth in long rows. 7

- 8. It is he who, by swallowing the waters of the great

+ Le. im commen parlance, “bright Canopus.” Agasti, of which
qgestye \s a produced form, ie derived with suffix (or seeming suffix)
enti, like gabhasti, from the base qj, enj, “to brighten,” « meaning
especially appareat from WW, Whe. Thus agasti signifes bright,
shining. From the same base is Wftq “ fire,” Wifi] “an ornament,”
and probably Wy, as well as Greek deri.

; ? The myths alluded to are so well knows, chiefly from the RisAyapa

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 83] =====
81

ocean, brought. it to grief, but, at the same time, to a state
of lustre, such as immortals only know, through the spark-
ling dolphins, water-elephants, serpents, and the. jewels
scattered round about.! :

4 The ocean, bereft, indeed, of its water, but covered with
floundering dolphins, pearl-oysters, and conch-shells was
lovely as the lake in autumn, with its rippling waves, water-
lilies, and swans.

6, It in he who made the sea shine as heaven, with dolphins
for ita white clouds, with precious stones for stars, with crystal
for its moon, with its drained bottom for a serene harvest sky,
and with the radiant gems in the hoods of snakes for comets
and planets. ,

6. The Vindhya stands raising its shaking summits, in
order to mar the road to the Day-god’s chariot ; like banners
gaily float on high the garments which support the disturbed
Elves (in moving through the sky), who are eagerly pressing
to their bosom their dear loves clinging to their shoulders;
the mountain waterfalls, issuing from the caves, are haunted
by lions, from whose heads hang, like chaplete of blue Bar-
lerias, clusters of bees following the scent of the elephant’s
frontal juice mingled with the quaffed blood; it seems as if

} The scholiast understands TaRTfUfem@afagia: to have =

double meaning : the first and natural one as rendered above ; the other,
ae referring to WAT, as follows: WUT BURNS: WERTH fae.
aire: 1 recereeaht @ gufafeaseafegen: 1 fafra
मत्स्वाहनाः केचित्‌ । थथा वितस्ता नदी । केचिष्वखमाः पानीयस्ाः।
यथा समुद्रे भगवान्नाराययः। केचिदिभया हस्तिनां पुषठयताः । यचेक
एएावथद्डः। बेचिष्मिह्ं कुटिलं गण्टन्ीति जिह्यगाः कुरिशगतथः |
Wer wWrereqerrcraet “fant: a “Now, waiving some minor
Points, eg. the inaccuracy of identifying prasphurat with न्मम, it will
be observed that the animal on which an image le represented to sit has
Utele to do with the god's ft ; most certainly the retrogradation of Mars
does, not show his 3}. Ta short, the second explanation le develd of

meaning.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 84] =====
82

the mountain is to touch the roof of the sky with his reared
rocky tops, where hyenas, bears, tigers, and monkeys dwell,
and crowds of inebriated bees, troubled and startled by the
elephants pulling down the blossoming trees, tune their
humming sounds; the Narmada embraces, like a loving damsel
in amorous sport, the mountain, where immortals frequent
the pleasure-grounds, and sages live without other food but
water, roots, and air. Such was the Vindhya, when he was

"stemmed by Agastys. Listen ye now to the description of

the Seer’s appearanoce.'

7. At the rise of Agastya, the waters, which (during the
rains) have grown soiled, through the contact with mud, be-
come clean spontaneously, like the heart of the virtuous.*

8. Autumn, by nurturing a row of noisy swans flanked on
both sides by ruddy geese, shines like a smiling lady showing
her (white) teeth, whose extremities are tinged red by the
use of betel.

9. Dazzling, like a dexterous damsel, who intimates her

' The rise of Canopus must have been celebrated already in Vaidic
times, as may be gathered from Rgveda 1, 170 and 180, 8, in which
latter passage the Acvins, the geniuses of the year, are invocated as
bestowing the boon of Canopus’ rising. In the same manner the Acvins
restere yeath to Cyavina or Cyavana (alias Bhrgu's son), i.e. Bhrgu
(Hesperus) is born again as Bhygu-putra (Lacifer).

कुसमायोवमखप्रदू चितानि ४०७ a double meaning. As attribute to
it le “defiled by contact with the wicked ;” yaa le “had
ooll, mud ;” SEAT: is “wicked men,” or, as Utpala expresses bimeelf,
अनाः, As to the idea expressed in the’ stanza, cf, Rija-
tarangigt, 8, 927; 2,144. Agastya’s purifying influence on the mind
seems to be hinted at also in Rgveda |. 179, 5 (an Agastya hyma, howe

ever fragmentary),

जअत्सीमावखघ्नमा तत्‌ घु मुचव्छहु पशुकामो हि wal:

His beneficent influence ie mentioned in the subsequent stanza:
खमौ वर्दायुषिशयः पुपोष car Sterheh ware
* As wall in this couplet as in the next following, we have tor. WUT

, With the MBS., in lien of UFC,

L, pw.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 85] =====
z

love by knitted brows and side glances, is Autumn adorned
with a cluster of hovering bees, while she abounds in white
water-lilies, blooming near blue lotuses.

10. As if desirous of beholding the lustre the Moon has
assumed after the disappearance of the rainy clouds, the pond
with its eddying waves opens at night its eyes, the water-lilics,
whoee petals cover black bees as beautiful lashes deck eyes with
dark pupils.

11. The earth, replete with pools that abound in a motley
variety of lotuses, swans, ruddy geese and ducks, presents,
as it wore, a hospitable gift of jewels, many flowers and
fruits to Agastya.

12. The water which has been poured out at Indra’s com-
mand by the snakes, whose bodies are wrapt in the clouds,
and thus has been stained by burning poison, becomes pure
at the appearance of Agastya.

13. He, Varuna’s son, removes ain, even when he is re-
membered, how much more when he is praised. How he
ought to be honoured has been taught by the Seers, which
I here repeat for the king’s sake. ~

14, The heliacal rising of Agastya for each country must
be found and stated by the astronomer through calculation.
Now, for Ujjain, this takes place, when the true place of the
san is seven degrees short of Virgo.* व

15, 16, At the time when the rays of morning just pieroe
through the nightly dark, the king, after being ehown by the
astrologer the point of Agastya’s rising, should reverentially

' As the translation does not clearly mark the corresponding parts of
the comparison, I subjoin part of the Comm.: Wim (Le. with TAETTT
and खितोत्पख) नेषद्ध साङृश्यमुकं । यतो .जेषं मध्वमाये छष्डसुभयपा-
थोः चितं भवति; and ०००७; अनिन (६, अमत्वर्पद्पद्धि yar
इमुक्तं । धतो गयनखोष्वमानस्ा धूता भवति। चत एवोपिते
खथुखता? ०८९. ॥ ४० 104४४ {७ 20०4 ०९०६. ¶४० विधम (कराच, otc.)
of the black eyes is compared to the Faraz of black bees, ~

* Colebrooke has coplonsly commented on thls passage, ०९. भो -

7

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 86] =====
84

lay down on earth, in honour of the guest, his gift, consisting
of fragrant flowers and fruits of the season, of jewels from
the sca, of gold, garments, a milch-cow, a bull, milk porridge,
cakes, curdles, barley-corns, fragrant incense, and salves.

17. When the king, with belief in his heart, offers this
gift, he will be freed from sins and conquer his enemies ; and if
he bring the oblation duly during seven years, he will soquire

18. A Brahman, offering « gift according to what he
chances to possess, obtains knowledge of the scriptures, wives,
and offspring; a Vaigya scquires land; 8 0079, great
wealth; and all shall obtain health and the reward of their
deserts.

19. When Agastya looks rough, he causes discases ; when
ruset, drought; when purple-tinged, harm to cows; when
twinkling, perils. ‘When he shows the colour of madder, he
brings famine and battles ; when he seems small, he forebodes
that the town shall be beleaguered.

20. Bat if, shining like gold or crystal, he refreshes, as it
were, the earth with streams of light, then the country will
have plenty of food and teem with a contented and healthy
population.

il, p. 853, org. (As. Res. ix.). ‘The passage from the Pancesiddbantika,
referred te by Colebreoke, as analagous to one in the Bhisvati, ie:

विुबच्छायाधेनुला पठतिख्ठत्कथाखरतस्चापम्‌ ।

कायाविसप्नकयुतं दश्षमिनुखितं विनाद्यसाः ॥
ताभिः कर्वटकायावक्वग्नं तादे सहला ।

याम्बाश्रावनितामुखविधेषतिखको मुनिरयसवः ॥

© Maltiply half the leagth of the equinoctial shadew by 255 take from
"this product, expressed in minutes, the corresponding arc; edd the
leagth of the shadew multiplied by 91; multiply by 10; this gives the
pumber in Vinigis. At this samber, reckoning from the beginning of
Cancer, stands the sun, when Agestys rise in the south, like a mark on
the freat of a demeel.”

~ ie

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 87] =====
=

21. Agastya brings danger of famine and pestilence, when
hurt by meteor or comet. He rises (thus it has been said
of yore) when the sun is standing in Hasta, and sets when the
ean has reached Rohint.!

Onarrern XIII.
The Course of. the Seven Seers (Great Bear).

1, 2. I shall tell, according to the theory of Vrddha-Garga,
the course of those Seven Seers by whom the northern region
is, as it were, protected; through whom she shines, as if
adorned with a string of pearls, like a maiden with joyful
countenance, wearing a wreath of white water-lilies; those .
‘Beven Seers by the turning round of whom the northern ~
‘region seems dancing, the pole-star being the regulator.

3. The Seven Seers were in Magha, when king Yudhish-
qhira ruled the earth, and the period of that king is 2526
years before the Caka era.*

4. They remain moving for a hundred years in each lunar

- 1 Gee Colebrooke, i.e. His statement that there are three periods of

rising and setting, according to Utpala, is not quite exact. On the coa-
trary, Utpala expressly intimates that the rising of Canopus, when the
sun stands in Hasta, is contrary to science, and only repeated by the
author out of deference for the Ancients. He says

which is quite trae; where our author uses figq, it is so much as

९००८० १९४०५ यदचापि बयितसाम्बं ग भवति। तवाणाया्येव Tee
SATTATA, WA |. The three periods of rising are enumerated by’
Parhcara, as quoted by Utpala. Here part of the passage: WWI
URAC: | HOS Vfieregaia Cifewtas wea | wares Fate
-चच्ारोदयकालो इषः । आश्युग्यङलाठमोपथदद्ोः कार्जिकाहन्वां
चा। तचाश्वधुग्वङजोदितः सुवुटिवेमात्रवन्पत्करः । इ० We.
* ‘This stanza is quoted by Kablaga in his Raje-tarnagigh, + 66.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 88] =====
86

mansion, and rise constantly in the north-east, together with
Arundhati.!

6, 6. At the eastern extremity stands Marici ; next to him
in westerly direction is Vasishtha; next to whom Angiras;
then Atri, next to whom Pulastya, Pulahs, and Krata, in
regular succession, beginning from the east. Arundhati,
that pattern of spouses, is seen next to Vasishtha.® —

7. When theee luminaries are pale, devoid of beams, faint
or vexed by meteors, thunderbolta, haze, and such-like, they

will destroy each their own dependency ;* on the contrary, -

they tend to make the same prosper, in case they seem large
and bright. .

8. Marici is understood to have power of doing harm to
Gandharvas, gods, demons, spells, herbs, angels, goblins,
dragons, and elves.

1 CL. Colebrooke, Mise. Essays, ll. p. 356. The other reading of the
latter part is rendered by Colebrooke, “ Being connected with that par-
ticalar Nakshatra, to which, when it rises in the East, the line of their
rising |e directed.” This does not agree with the Sanskrit words, as
given by Colebrooke in a foot-note, but these are evidently misprinted.
One MB. of the Comm. has: ATYEUM “MATA VHA Z ATs
the laterpretation of which 1७: सजिवरात्‌ निरन्तर । परायुदयतः प्राक्‌

पुवष्ठां दिश्चदयतो weet Rat (1) waren went स्तविपङ्मा
waft 1 we afere® sya: fart cies urge मवति ।
[we wot तेषां ख प्रानुदयतः सपतर्षिपद्धिः खषा भवति] तसितरिव
flgrt CH | Text and commentary are corrupted and adulterated 5 n0
maech is certain, whereas Colebrooke's rendering cannot but express the
purport. Now, we have to r. *URTWAY MT: in the text, for Wand |
are regularly confounded ; in the Comm. Rf Is, in both instances, an
error for RUT (VAT), and this the word by which Jw of the text was
eadered. ‘The passage is debased to such an extent that the band of
Utpala is only partially visible.

® Consequently, the stars © , 7, 8;  ¢. and x, of the Great Bear, cor-
respead to Krate, Pulabs, Pulastya, Atri, Angiras, Vasishtha, and
Maricl, Arundhati must be the small star near (, called Alcor or g.

5 Mentioned in the subsequent verses.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 89] =====
ह

9. Vasishtha, when hurt, is deadly to the Scythians,
Yavanas, Dards, Pirates, Kambojas, and hermits living in
the wilderness; he gives prosperity, when he is radiant.

10. Scholars, wise men, and Brahmans are enumerated as
belonging to Angiras; and foresters, aquatic produces, the
sea and rivers are allotted to Atri.

11. To Pulastya are said to belong giants, devils, children
of darkness, fiends and serpents; to Pulaha, roots, and fruits;
and to Kratu, sacrifices and sacrificers.

 

Onarrer XIV.
Division of the Glode.'

1, Each group of three lunar mansions, to begin with
Kyttiké, forms a ninth of the whole series; to each of these
Groups corresponds. part of the countries, the division of
which begins at the centre in Bhérata-varsha, proceeding
hence to the eastward, south-eastward, and so forth.*

} The word kérma Is the specific Sanskrit form of a word once common
to all Indo-European tongues, viz. kurme, Lat. culmus, Teuton. holm,
ete. It does not originally denote the “ tortoise” itself, but its back, for
the proper meaning Is “mound, buckle, half-globe, holm.” Even in
Sanskrit, In such compounds as Atrmonnats, the word signifies the
form of the back of the tortoise. At the time whea the term
became current, kiirma was taken in its proper sense. Yet in later times
they wholly mistook the meaning, and made an absurd drawing, repre-
seating a tortoise, as if kdrma could denote a level! ‘The rendering by
“globe” is not wholly exact, since properly only » half-giobe, a hele, le
supposed to be raised above the waters. © Ind. Stud. x. 909.

* The astrological use of this partition Is, that, a particalar group of
Noksbatras belng vexed, the corresponding group of countries suffers
too, of, as Garga puts it: .

| hin Saban वदे डा |
a wwei -fawteera
Caria fia yh arire: wretown 1
Wreeq reer चाम्ब लान्वायो दचिशापराम्‌ ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 90] =====
88

2, 8, 4. The centre is formed by the Bhadras, Arimedas,
Mandavyas, Silvas, Nipas, Ujjihinas, Sankhy&tas, Marwir,
the Vateas, Ghosha, those who dwell along the banks of the
JamnA and Saraavatt, the Mateyas, Madhyamikas, Mathurese,
Upajyotisha, Dharmirapya, the Gdrasenas, Gauragrivas,
Uddehikas, Pandus, Gudas, Acvatthas, Pancélas, Oudhe,
the Kankas, Kurus, Kilkote, the Kukuras, PariyAtra-hills,
Udumbares, Kapishthalas, and Hastindpurs.

6, 6, 7. In the east are situated the four mountains, named
Anjana, Vyshabhadhvaja, Padma, and Malyavat; then the
Vyfighramukhas,' Suhmas, Karvatas, Candrapur, the (irpa-
karpas, Khasas, Magadha, Mount Cibira, Mithila, Samatata,
Orissa, the Acvavedanas, Danturakas, Prdgjyotisha, the
Brahmaputrs,* the Milksea, the Ocean, the Cannibals, the
Mountain of Sunrise, the Bhadras,? Gauras,* Paundras, Ut-
kala, Kasi, Mekala, the Ambeshthas,> the one-footed people,
Tamaliptika, the Kausalakas, and Bardwan.

8, 9, 10. In the south-east are Kosala, Kalinga, Vanga,
‘Vanga minor, the Jathara-Angas, Saulikes (or Maulikas?),
‘Vidarbha, the Vatess, Andhra, Cedi, the Urdhvakanthas, the

1 Le. tiger-faced men 5” most likely a mythical people, as well as the
Acravadanas (‘‘horse-faced beings,” with Pardcara: Vajimukhas), the
‘\evewpecwne of the Periplus Maris Eryth.

® Whether the term Lauhitya or Lohitya properly should be applied
te the river seems doubtfal. Probably the name of the stream was
Lehite, “ Red river,” whereas the people in its vicinity or some district
pear it, were called Lauhitya, One M8, of the Comm. has actually
WATER गदः, ०००८८ ४०००, लौहित्यो नद्‌:

2 Le. “the Blessed,” probably the same with the Bhadricgvas. Cf.
€. 9. 11.

॥ Le. “ the Whites,” sapposed to live in Gvetadvipa, which, according
to Kathisaritslgara 54, 18, 190, lies near the Cocos-island. See the first
note of the next page.

2 These are the Ambeste of Ptolemy, vil. 1, 66, erg., not to be con-
founded with their namesakes in the North-West. CL Lassen, Altert. ii.
Ul. p. 174, seg. ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 91] =====
Island of Bulls, of Cocoas,! of Tree-barks, the inhabitants of
the recesses of the Vindhya-range, Tripurt, the (macrudharas,
Homakundys,* the Vydlagrivas (i.¢., beings with snake necks),
MahAgrivas (i.¢., people with long necks), Kishkindha, Kan-
tekasthala, the territory of the Aborigines, Purikas, Da-
garnas,? naked Cabaras and Parpa-Cabaras.‘ These are the
regions standing under the group Aglesh’, Magh&, and
Pdrva-Phalgunt.

11-16. In the south are Ceilon, the KAlajinas, Seuris,
Ktrpas,5 Talikata, Girnar, the Malaya-, Dardura-, Mahendra-,
and Malindya-hills, Bhroach* Kankata, Tankana, Vanavisi-
district, the Cibikas, Phayikéras, Konkan, the Abhtras, the
Mines (Kandeish), the Vend-river, Avanti, Dagapura, the
Gonardas, Kerala, Karnatic, the Great Forest, the Citrakate-
hills, Nasik, Kollagiri, Cola, Krauncadvipe, the Jatédharas,
the river Kavert, Mount Rishyamike, the Mines of beryl-
stone, the places where conch-shells and pearls are found,
Atri’s hermitage, the Mariners,’ Yama’s city, the Islands,*
Gapardjya, Krehna-Vellira, the Pigikas, Mount Carp, Mount
Kusuma, Tumbavana, the Karmaneyakas, the South Sea, the -
Hormitages, the Rehikas, Konoht, Maruct,? Corya, Aryaka,

1 According to Kathtsaritsigara 9, 54, 14 and 56, 54, the Cocos-island
is a greet Island. -

* This is the preferable reading, as Paricara exhibits the same form.

* The Dosurene or Desarene of the Periplus Maris.Eryth. CL Lassen
Altert, ili. p. 202.

* de. “leaf-savages,” meaning those that feed upon leaves. ‘They are
manifestly the Phyllite of Ptolemy. .

* The Comm. r. SFC ate. and takes it for ove word. ‘The Souris I
presume to be the Sores of Ptolemy. “ ,

* The Barygaza of the Greeks.

1 These may be the Pirates of Greek sources.

® Apparently the Maledives. ^

ह, 3.2 2. 3 72727 7 1 १41
from Murizis) of the Greeks. * ध

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 92] =====
90

the Sinhalas,' Rshabhas, Baladeva-pattana,* Dandaké-forest,
the Timingil&canas (i.¢., whale-eaters),? Bhadras (i.c., blessed),
Kach (in the Dekkan), Kunjara-dart (i.¢., elephant’s cave),
and the river Tamraparnt.

17-19. In « south-western direction (from the midland)
are the following tracta:' Of the Pahlavas, Kambojas, Sin-
dhu-Sauviras, Vadavdmukhs,> Arava, the Ambashthas, Ka-
pilas, Narimukhas ((.., men with a woman’s face), Anartas,
Phepagiri, the Yavanas, Makaras, Karnapraveyas,* Paragavas,
Qfdras, Barbaras, Kirdtas, Khandas, (i.c., dwarfs?), Raw-
flesh-eaters, Abhiras, Cancikas, Hemagiri, the Indus, Ka-
lakes, Raivatakas, Surashtrians, Badaras, and Dravidas.’
These, as well as the great (Indian) Ocean, stand under the
three asterisms, SvAti, Vicdkh4, and Anurddha.

20, 21. In the west are the Manimat and Meghavat hills,

1 Ie is strange here to find Sinhala after the occarrence of Lanké in
vel. ^

* The Belalpetna of Ptolemy, so that the r. Palalpatna, preferred
by Lassen, is proved to be a false form ; see Lassen, Altert. ill. pp. 181
and 183.

3 ‘The Comm. sees two words in the compound, viz. Talmingilas and
Sanas or Canas, whatever this may be.

* Some of the countries enumerated do not lie in the S.W., e.g. the
Kambojas, Yavanas, Ambashthas, and others.

* In the astronomical Siddhintas Vagavimukha is the supposed abode
of the dead at the South Pole.

© Synonymous with Karpapriveya is Karpaprivaraga. Now, RTICQ
fs synonymoes with WTfW, so that HITE either stands for WIE,
oe RAfig and WTR are derived from the same base with WIRY. The
Mirkaggeya-Parips 58, 31, has Karyapridheya, in which dh Is a mis-
read o.

1 Or, as another MS. has, Dramigas. There mast be some Dravidian
tribe in the West, perbaps the Brahui in Beluchistan, who belong to
the Dravidian stock. See Caldwell, Drav. Grammar, p.11. It is worth
while remarking that Paricara ia his enumeration mentions Dramiqas,
Dravides in the East too; those seem to be the tribes of the Rajmahal
hills. See Caldwell, /.c.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 93] =====
91

Vanaugha, Mount Kshurarpana, the Mountain of Sunset,
the Aparintakas (i.¢., people of the western marches), (An-
tikes, Haihayas, Mount Pracasta, the VokkAnas, the Panjab,
Ramathes, Pirates, Tarakshiti, the Jpngas, Vaicyas, Gold-
Soythians,' and all the lawless hordes of barbarians living in
the west.

22, 23. In the north-west are the Mandavyas, Tukhéras,
Talas, Hales (or Lahas), Madras, Acmakas,* Kulitas, Labads
(or Ladsha),? the kingdom of the Amazons, the Man-lions,
the Woods,‘ the inhabitants of the sky, the rivers Venumatt,
Phalguluké, and Guruha,’ the Marukuccas (or Murukuccas),
Carmarangas, the One-eyed men, the Siilikas (or Milikas),
the Long-necks, Long-faces, and Long-hairs.

24-28, In the north lie the mountains known as Kailésa,
Himalaya, Vasumat, Dhanushmat, Kraunca and Mera, the
Hyperboreans, Kshudramtnas, Kaikayas, Vasitis, those who
live near the sources of the Jamn4, Bhogaprastha, the Arju-
nfyanas, Agnidhras (or Agnityas), Adarca, Antardvipa,
Trigarta, the Horse-faced, Dog-faced,* Long-haired, Flat-
noses, Diserakas, Vatadhinas, (aradhanas, Takshagilé, Push--
kalavatt, the Kailavatas, Kanthadh4nas, Ambaras, Madrakas,
Mialavas, Pauravas, Kaocharas, Daydapingalakas, Ménahalas,

1 The Comm. explains differently, “the region of Gold” and = Sey-
thians.”

* The Assakanol of the Greeks.

* This seems to be Labara, so frequently mentioned in Rija-taran-
givt, eg. 7, 919, 1378 (Lthare “Laharian,” 1173). It is « borderland
betwixt Kashmir and Dardistin; to this identification of Lahara and
Lahads, it will not be objected that our author, committing the grave
blunder of placing Kashmir and Dardistin in the North-east (v. 99),
should needs have assigned a wrong situatiod to Lahaga too. .

‘ The Comm. takes yfatyet for ove word.

® Gurubé (also Garuhf) Is, to my apprebeusion, the Garvigas of the
Greeks ; the river district they called Goryala, Lassen, in his Altert.
iil. p. 127 and 136, identifies the Greek name with Gaurt. It need not
be pointed out bow exactly both forms coincide with Garubé and Gurabé.

* R, with one MB. of the Comm. YTATTUNGST. च

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 94] =====
92

Huns, Kohalas, Citakas (or Catakas), Mandavyas, the city
of the Spirits, the Gandharians, the town of Yagovati,* the
Hematalas, Kshatriyas,? the inhabitants of the sky, Gavyas,
Yaudheyas, Disameyas, Cyamikes, and Kshemadhirtas.

29-81. In the north-east are Meruka, the kingdom of the
Dead, the Nomads, Kiras, Kashmirians, Abhisiras, Dards,
Tangapas, Kulitas, Sairindhas, the Wood territory, Brahma-
para, the Darwas, Dimaras, the kingdom of the Woods, the
Kirftas, Chinese, Kauyindas, Bhallas, Palola (the swamps),‘
the Demons with elf-locks, the Kunathas, Khasas, Ghoshas
(stations of herdsmen), Kucikas, the One-footed people,
the Anuvicvas, Gold region,’ the groves of Vasus (spirits),
the inhabitants of Heaven,‘ Pauravas, the people clad in
barks, the beings with three eyes, Mount Munja, and the
Gandharvas.

82, 33. In case these groups, the first of which consists
of Kyttiké, Rohipt, and A¢vini, and so forth, suffer from evil
planets; then the following monarchs, in regular order, are
to perish ; to wit: the kings of Pancdla, Magadhs, Kalinga,
Avanti, Anarta; farther, he of the Sindhu-Seuviras, HAra-
hauras, Madras; and, finally, he of the Kuyindas meets his
fate.

* Paricara has: YCYAFCS “ thecity of the gods, of the Spirits,”

* A mythical city of the Elves.

® ‘The Chatrialol of Ptolemy.

© R. AUT: TETAS; pelos must be the vulgar pronunciation for the
Gkr. pelocia, “swamp, marsh.” The modern name is Teral, the
eastern part of which, near Coesh Behar, seems to be meant by paiole in
our list,

© In all likelihood a mythical land; with Ptolemy it is called Chryse
(& Laseen, Altert. Sil. 249), which is not to be confounded with the real
island and peninsula Caryse. The latter is held to be Malakka; the
Golden Island, hewever, the existence of which is denied by Lassen
(Altert. S31. 247), but sufficiently attested not ealy by the Gresks, but
aleo in the Kathisarit-sigara x. 54,90; 56,63; 57,72; xvill. 123, 110,
canact be but Samatra, including, perhaps, Java. Cf. Rimfyapa, iv.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 95] =====
93

Onarren XV.

Allotment of animate and inanimate objects to the asteriems
severally.

1. To Kyttiké are assigned: White flowers, keepers of
holy fires, reciters of sacred poetry, those who know the
sacrificial rules, grammarians, miners, barbers, Brahmans,
potters, chaplains, and makers of calendars.*

2. To Rohint: Keepers of devotional observances, mer-
chandises,? kings, wealthy persons, those that are engaged in
religious meditation, waggoners, cows, bulls, aquatic animals,
agriculturists, stony heights, and domineering men.

8. To Mrgagiras: Fragrant things, garments, aquatic pro-
duces, flowers, fruits, jewels, beings roaming the woods, birds,
wild deer, Soma-drinkers, musicians, lovers, and letter-bearers.

4. To Ardr&: Slayers, catchers, cheats, adulterers, thievish
persons, falee-hearted men, instigators to discord, husk grain,
bravoes, charmers, bewitchers, and ghost-banners.‘

5. To Punarvasu: Truthful, noble-minded, pure, well-born,
handsome, sensible, estimable and rich men, the most prized
grain sorte,> dealers, attendants, and artisans,

6. To Pushya: Barley, wheat, rice, sugar-cane, woods,
royal counsellors, men living by water,’ honest men, and
persons delighting in solemn and occasional sacrifices.

1 ‘The astrological use of such a division is taught below, v. 31.

* The principle upoa which the allotment rests ls perspicaces; most
of the classes of persons enumerated are in constant connection with’
fire, the lord of Krttiks ; the barbers pertain to the asterism on account
of kyttiké signifying “a razor.” The makers of calendars de oo
because Krttik& once was the first Nakshatra of the year. . ॥

* One MS. of the Comm. 7. Yl, explaining it by TUG WW:
of holy deeds.”

* All evildoers are assigned to Ardri, because this asteriam is pre-
aided over by Civa, their patroa.

According to Utpala, SWAQTUNIE. =. ` -

* Chiefy fishers, WOTHTET: ae

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 96] =====
94

7. To Aglesh&: Counterfeits, bulbs, roots, fruits, insects,
makes, poison, robbers, husk grain, and all classes of leeches.

3. To Magh&: The possessors of wealth and corn, granaries,
mountaineers, men pious towards ancestors, traders, heroes,
carnivorous animals, and woman haters.

9. To Parva-Phalgunt: Mimics, damsels, amiable persons,
musicians, artisans, merchandises, cotton, salt, honey, oil,
and boys.

10. To Uttara-Phalgunt: Mild, pure, modest, heretical,!
charitable, and studious persons, fine sorts of corn, men of
great wealth, of virtue, and monarchs.

11. To Hasta: Robbers, elephants, charioteers, elephant-
drivers, artisans, merchandises, husk grain, scholars, mer-
chants, and energetic men.

12. To Citr&: Persons skilled in the art of attire, jewelry,
dyeing, painting, music, and perfumery, as well as arithme-
ticians, weavers, oculists, and king’s corn.*

13. To Svati: Birds, wild deer, horses, traders, corn, such
| produces of the field as cause flatulency,? men fickle in friend-
6) 99 ahip, feeble characters, ascetics, and connoisseurs of wares.

14, To Vigdkh&: Trees with red blossoms and fruits,
seeamum, beans, cotton, peas, lentils, and men devotedly
attached to Indra and Agni.

16: To Anuridh&: Gallant men, deacons of corporations,
persons delighting in the fellowship of the good,‘ travellers,
honest people generally, and all that grows in autumn.

16. To Jyeshth&: Heroical men, persons of good family,
wealth and fame, thieves, ambitious kings, and commanders
of armies.

17. To Mola: Medicaments, physicians, foremen of corpo-
rations, persons dealing in flowers, roots and fruits, various
seeds, very rich men, and individuals feeding on fruits and
roots.

*B. UTE, Le. “beresy.”

* Explained os Ufeanfe.

® Vin, lentils, ete.

° १४ Comm. difereatly, aTyat जे रलाः। गोहिदता नमायक्नाः

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 97] =====
95

18. To Parva-Ashadh&: Soft-minded men, people frequent-
ing water-roads, truthful, pure and wealthy men, makers of
bridges (and dikes), persons living by water, aquatic fruits
and flowers.!

19. To Uttara-Asbadhi: Mahouts, boxers, elephants,
horses, pious men, immovables, soldiers, persons living in
comfort, and energetic men.

20. To Cravana: Jugglers, constantly active, able, enter-
prising and righteous men, Vishnuites, and speakers of truth.

21. To DhanishtbA: Contemptible and unmanly individuals,
fickle friends, men obnoxious to their wives,’ charitable, rich
and quiet persons.

22. To Qatabhishaj: Snarers, fish-catchers, aquatic pro-
duces and dealers in fish; to this division belong also boar-
hunters, bleachers, distillers, and fowlers.

23. To POrva-Bhadrapad&: Robbers, herdsmen, mischiev-
ous persons, niggards, low and false-hearted people, those
who are devoid of yirtue and devotion, and boxers.

24. To Uttara-Bhadrapad&: Priests, persons in the habit
of sacrificing, giving alms, and leading an austere life, men
of magnificence, ascetics, heretics, sovereigns, and grain of
best quality.

25. To Revati: Aquatio fruits and flowers, salt, jewels,
oconch-shells, pearls, and other produces from water, fragrant
blossoms, perfumes, traders, and helm’s-men.

26. To Agvint: Horse-dealers,* commanders of armies,
leeches, attendants, horses, horsemen, merchants, handsome
persons, and horse-grooms.

27. To Bharani: Those that feed on blood and flesh, cruel
men, slayers, catchers, cudgellers, husk grain, low-born per>
eons, and men wanting in character.

1 Thus it is understood by Utpels, and notwithstanding the irregu-
larity of the construction, it must be the parpert of the statement.

* R. of course in the text, RWIT:.

* Utpela, WWTUTEST:; the term in the text sounds epprobriows, bet
in all countries a horse-dealer and a horse-thief are held-te be inter-
changeable terms. ^ `

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 98] =====
96 = (.4 0 -

- ` 28. The threo asterisms, whose’ name begins with Pirva,
‘as well as Kyttikd, are the Brahmans’ own; the three Uttaris
‘and Pushya, are the princes’; Rohini, Revatt, Anurfdhé, and
Maghf, are the husbandmen’s.

“ 29. Panarvasu, Hasta, Abhijit, and Agvint, are declared
-to be the asterisms of merchants;! Mila, Ardré, Sviti, and
Qatabhishaj, exercise dominion over the cruel classes of society.
$0. Mrgaciras, Jyeshthé, Citra, and Dhanishthé have power
-over servants. The outcasts are assigned to Acleshi, Vickha,
-Qravana, and Bharapt.

+ 81, 82. A lunar mansion is said to be hurt, when occupied
by the Sun or Saturn, when damaged by Mars cutting through
‘or retrograding in it, when suffering from an eclipee,* when hit
“by 9 meteor, when manifestly crushed by the moon,’ or, in
abort, when something extraordinary happens with it. All
-this is noxious to the fore-mentioned dependency of the pare
‘tioular asterism, whereas the contrary augurs prosperity.

` १६५. (० ए» बथिग्जनाना गृद्राथां ।

J © That is te say, when sun or moon standing in it le eclipsed:
` चत्रदचख्ितो ° कंशण्रो वा राङुया wea:

«| hit. when the moon goes through the middle of the jasiction star, or
takes her course fo the southern part: WE WWWS HAT WYSE

रुकामिदभमाच्डादन rerware qf Tt करोति । #

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 99] =====
97> V2itle

Onarrer XVI.

Countries, People, and Things belonging to the Domain of each
~ Planet.

1-5. The eastern half of the Narbadda district, the Copa,
Orissa, Vanga, Suhma, Kalinga, Balkh, the Soythians, Greeks,
Magadhas, Cabaras, Prdgjyotisha, the Ohinose, Kambojas,
Mekalas, Kirdtas, Vitakas,! the people. beyond and within
the Mountains,* the Pulindas, the eastern half of the Dra-
vides, the south bank of the Jamn4, Camp4, Udumbara,
KaugAmbi, Cedi, Vindhysa forest, Kalinga,? Pundra, Mounts
GolAngils, Criparvata, Bardwaa, the river Ikshumatt; more-
over, robbers, Parata, wilderncsses, herdsmen, seeds, grains
in husks, pungent substances (pepper, ete.), trees, gold, fire,
poison, heroes, medicines, physicians, quadrupeds, ploaghmen,
princes, evil-doers, chiefs on march, thieves, beasts of prey,
woods, renowned men and bravoes; of all these the San is
the lord.¢

* These are the same tribes who by a synonymous term are called
Lampikas and Utsavasanketas; they are sald to scorn the Institation of
matrimony, and to form only temporal engagements, lasting for the
time of a festival. ॥

* ie, a part of the Himflaya; cf. Mahabb. il. 27, 3 (Bombay ed.)

® The author forgets that he has mentioned Kalinga just before. .

‘ Throughout this chapter Vartha-mihira appears to bave chiefly
followed Kicyapa ; for comparison the corresponding passage in KA-

cyapa here follows:

॥ तथाच काश्पः

मयर नर्मदाया भोयं शवरमामघान्‌।
। ओङ़ान्वङ्गान्‌ कलिङ्गा ख वाददीकाग्यवनाच्छकान्‌ ॥
: . 8

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 100] =====
6-8. The Moon presides over: mountain strongholds, forts
defended by water, Kosala, Bharoach, the Ocean, the Romans,
Tocharians, Vanavisi-district, Tangana, Hala, the kingdom
of the Amazons, the islands of the great Ocean, things of
sweet taste, flowers, fruits, water, salt, gems, conch-shells,
pearls, aquatic products, rice, barley, weeds, wheat, the
Soma-drinkers, princes coming to the rescue of their allies,
priesta, white objects, beloved persons, horses, paramours,
dameels, generals, food, clothes, horned animals, night-walk:
ing beings, agriculturists and pereons acquainted with sacri
ficial rules.

9-15. The inhabitants of the western half of the districts
of the Copa, Narbadd& and Bhimaratha, the Nirvindhya,
Vetravatt, Sipré, -Godavart, Vena, Mandakint, Payoshni,!
Mahinad!, Sindhu, Malatt, Para, North Pandya, Mount
Mahendra, those who live near the Vindhya and Malaya
hills, the Colas, Dravidas (or Dramidas), Videhas, Andhras,
Agmakas, BhAsiparas,* Konkan, Matrishika,? Kuntala, Kerala,
| काम्बोबाशेकवान्मुद्यान््रागण्योतिषकिरातकान्‌ ।

चीभान्सवामु (?) धरेखेयाग्पार्वताग्बहिरग्तवान्‌ ॥
wren चाम्ब दलं कीशाम्ग्योदुम्बराणि च

“ बिन्णयारवीच्पुष्टाख वर्धमान पवतम ॥ `

ओपर्वतं चेदिपुरं गोलाद्ूलं तथेव च ।
इषुमल्वाभिता ये च अनाः शूरा मदोत्कराः ४
कान्ारमव गोपां कन्दरा सखखाराखथा ।
खमरे विषमाच्कूराणय्छरान्‌ कटुकानपि ॥
अतुष्पादान्भेवजां ख धान्य भिवजस्तथा |
अरख्याथिन्याडां ख कार्पकान्यालकांखथा &
गौरं चत्‌ पद्चकिल्लस्तं yew ये च जन्तवः ।

. स्वां भाखर्‌ः सवामी तेवसेबसििनामपि ॥

[वि ® Another reading, also in KAcyapa, is Paroshy!.

® Or Badotpuraor Bhéstveras. May be, Bhdsfparas (== Bhfstveras),
means “these whe live on this side of Mount Bhisa.” Utpala gives no

explanation.
® Perhaps an errer of the copyists er of the copies of some works

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 101] =====
Dandaka, KAntipura, the Barbarians, half-castes, townspeople,
agriculturists, Paratas (or quicksilver), people using fire in
their trade, professional soldiers, foresters, fortresses, boroughs
(or the, Karvatas), slayers, cruel men, arrogant fellows,
kings, princes, elephants, hypocrites, riots,! blows, herdsmen,
red fruits and flowers, coral, generals, sugar, spirits, anything
sharp, treasuries, keepers of holy fires, mines, Buddhist
monks, thieves, false, vindicative, and gluttonous persons ;
all these have Mars for their lord. ,

16-20. To Mercury’s domain belong: the Lauhitys, Indus,
Saray, Gambhtriké, Rathasyé,* Ganges, Kaucikt, and other
rivers, Videha, Kamboja, the eastern half of Mathura, the
Himalaya-, Gomanta-, and Citrak(te- mountaineers, Sa-
rashtrians, dikes (and bridges), water-roads, merchandize,
inhabitants of caverns, hill-people, water-reservoirs, mecha-
nicians, singers, caligraphists, connoisseurs of precious stones,
dyers, perfumers, painters, grammarians, arithmeticians, out-
fitters? preparers of potions securing longevity,‘ artisans,
spies, jugglers,® infants, poets, false-hearted men, denuncia-
tors, exorcisers, envoys, eunuchs, buffoons, ghost banners, -
magicians, policemen, stage performers, dancers, ghee, oil,

consulted by the author, for UETSYWMT: “ with Atri’s hermitage and
the Behikas.” ch. xix. 14 and 18.

* The r. FEAT of the printed text would denote “ ignorants.”

* It Is difficalt to decide upon the true form; my M&S, of C. have
NUS, TUT, Cray, or THT. Ch B. and R. Sans. Dict. Lv.

* The construction in the text is ungrammatical, jue being connected
not only with dyuskyc and gilpa, but also with gepits, cebde, and
Mekhye. The irregularity would disappear if we read prasidhena.

“ ००००. आयुषं द खायनं वाजीकरणादि। .
° ए; शुदकेनाहुतेन प्रखेनादिदर्थेनेन ये जीवन्ति The word:
Hw, or, asa MS. has in the passage cited In the footnote on ch. fi. 16,
Wat, is evidently synonymous with WY. Since the verbal base प्रस्‌
. # stated to mean “to extend,” like HUQ, WOW or WENT must be o
regular derivative of it, or the base may have been made in order to
explain the existing noun. Neither W@W nor HUW is found in the dic-

tlenaries, .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 102] =====
100
eceds, anything bitter, votaries, preparers of philters, and .
mules.

21-25. The eastern part of the Indus, the western half of
- Mathur&, the Bharatas, Sauviras, Srughnas, Northerners, the
rivers VipicA ‘and Catadra, the Ramathas, Sdlvas, Trigar-
tians, Pauravas, Ambashthas, Piratas, VAteadhinas, Yau-
dheyas, Sarasvatas, Arjuntyanas, half the rural provinces of
Matsys, elephants, horses, royal chaplains, kings, ministers,
persons engaged in festivals and actions for promoting well-
being, compassionate, trathful, honest, pious, learned, chari-
table, and righteous men, citizens, rich men, grammarians,
philologers, knowers of the Veda,! exorcisers, politicians,
royal equipments, umbrellas, banners, chowries, eto., benzoin,
spikenard, borax, costus, myrrh, salt, pepper (or beans), sweet
juices, honey, wax and Coraka-perfume : all these are Jupiter’s.

26-30. To Venus belong: the Takehagilas, MarttikAvatas,
Hill districts, Gandharians, PushkalAvatas, Prasthalas, Ma-
lavas, Kaikayas, DacArpas, Ucinaras, Cibis, those who drink
the waters of the VitastA, Irivatt, and Oandrabhigs, chariots,
ailver-mines, elephants, horses, elephant-drivers, wealthy men,
fragrant things, flowers, unguents, gems, diamonds, orna-
ments, lotuses, couches, bridegrooms, young fellows, dameels,
necessaries for love-making,’ invigorating remedies? those
that take sweets, parks, water, lovers, renowned, happy,
liberal-minded and handsome men, scholars, ministers, mer-
chants, potters, speckled birds, cardamoms, cloves, bdellium,
silk, wool, bleached silk, Lodh-bark, malobathrum (P), cassia-
bark, mace, agallochum, orrisroot, pepper and sandal.

31-84. Saturn’s are: Anartta, Arbuda, Pushkara, the Su-
rashtrians, Abbtras, ((dras, Raivatakas, the country where the
Serasvati disappears, the western country, the inhabitants of
Kuru-fields,* Prabhisa, Vidigs, Veda-Smyti, those who dwell

- "The ungrammatical nomis. pl. sidushe} is by no means rare in the
Mabdbb. and kindred works. .

* Comm. JETATUTHRTUTIE:
॥ ° For Fer. “८

५ 4.५. च वन about Thanesar (Skr. Sthépot;vere).

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 103] =====
101

along the banks of the Maht, rogues, dirty fellows, low |
people, oil-millers, cowards, eunuchs, fetters,! fowlers, dis-

honest men, fishers, deformed persons, presbyters,* swineherds,

foremen of companies, those that have broken their vows, the

Qabaras, Pulindas, poor men, anything pungent and bitter,

potions, widows, snakes, thioves, queens, donkeys, camels,

lentils, and such grains in pods as cause flatulency.*

35-87. To Rahu belong: the inhabitants of mountain peaks,
of dens and chasms, the tribes of Barbarians, (Odras, Jackal-
eaters, Silikas, VokkAnas, the people with horse faces, crippled
porsons, those who dishonour their lineage, evil-doers, un-
grateful men, thieves, faithless, dishonest and stingy persons,
donkeys, spies, boxers, wrathful men, un-born children, low
people, reprobates, hypoorites, giants, all sleepy beings, law-
less men, peas and sesamum.

38-89. The following are enumerated as pertaining to the
domain of Ketu:* mountain strongholds, the Pahlavas, Cvetas,
Huns, Oolas, Afghans, the Desert, Chinese, the Marches, rich
men, those that wish to achieve great things, resolute and
energetio men, adulterers, disputants, those that take joy at
‘another man’s misfortune, persons elated with pride, block-
heads, unjust and ambitious men. .

40. A planet is auspicious to those whose lord he is men-
tioned to bo, if, at rising, he be large, bright and in his
nataral state, if no typhoon, meteor, dust or planetary con-
flict annoy him, and when he stands in his own mansion, has
reached his height, and is looked at by benign planets.

41. If a planet shows signs contrary to the aforesaid, his
dependency is ruined; people and kings feel sad, suffering
from affraye, unsafety and disease.

' This is an elliptical way of intimating “jallers and captives,
WINGTET WTAITE, as Utpala understands it.

* Comm. विदः

* 0०००. चातखा राजमाषप्रमुतयः, ४५ भिष्यावाः चाखयः। `

‘The singular Keta is here perfectly meaningless, because is the
system of Variha-mibira Rabu is both the ascending aud the descending
node; just before (v. 87) Rabu is called Arkacacicatru. - The plaral
Ketavah would denote “ the comets.” हि

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 104] =====
102

42. Ifno danger awaits the kings from the foe, then, tobe.
sare, it threatens them from their own sons or ministers. In
consequence of the drought, the country-people will frequent
towns, mountains and rivers which they never visited before."

"The whole of this chapter has been condensed in the anthor's
Semfes-Ganbits inte the following +

तथाच खमाखसंहितायाम्‌
भागोरङ्ककलिङ्धवज्यमुनाः अीपर्वतः पारता

जाङीकाः कुटमुद्यधोवमनघाः प्राङ्कमदाधं चकाः।

Shara अवरोदृपौष्डुयवना चाम्यथ्िता मेकलाः
~ चीनोदुग्बरवर्धमानविरकाचगेषुमल्ाभिताः ॥

अखपर्वतदुर्गको्जला वनिताराष्यतुष्छाररङ्कलाः।

अणवासिहखाः खरस्वती सीतांशोर्मर्कच्छकोशलाः ॥

चितिवस्ठ महानदी परोष्डी चेवा वेचवती च माजती ।

मवयद्रमिडाद्मकान्प्रवोला मीमार्धच परोच थे सिताः ॥

चारा विष्वा पिमः भोमानो गोदावयीः बलमद्विर्भहेद्धः।

, चिप विन्धुमूमिवस्येति रेभा वदेदाग्जाष्डुखाः केरणाख ॥
सौम्यस्व सौराद्रकमोगरेथौ बङ्धाभिताख्ोत्तरकुलनयः।
-  . विन्धवर्धमक मधुरापुर खात्‌ सुवास्तुखिन्धद्विमुहाभिताख ॥
, जीवस्य सारस्तमत्खयाखाः प्राकिसिन्धुमामो मवुरापरार्धम्‌ ।
"gw: wag Carat बिपाध्ा धेमतेयोभेयकपारताख ॥

शिता मुगोखकध्रिखा वितस्ता बान्वारकाः केकयाः पौलवाञ्च ।

दाच्ा्ंकोप्रीगरचनक्ःमागाः श्वाः दसप्रखवकायवास्ाः ॥

-अरसखती यच गता प्रवा वेदखूती मालवकाः सुराद्राः। `

सदेव पिद नी च कुना णर .

Tr: wawgecteniteyg-

Wrereyfwefirguieguars:
Wrergrefattgiiientorg
अर्मखर्हिंखपरदाररताः वलास ॥

, fates qreftern waren wey: weitere: | .
व्ववखाथपराकरमोपपच्ाः परदारागुरता मदोत्वराख ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 105] =====
103

Cuarrer XVII.
Planetary Conflict.

1. How and when a conflict (of the planets) will take place,” —
according to the teaching of the sages who know past, pre-
eent, and future, has been explained by me in the Astrono-
mical Treatise, after the Sirya-siddhAnta.

2. The planets move in the firmament in severally higher
and higher orbits, but owing to the great distance they seem,
to our sight, to move in the same plain.

8. According to the degree of their (seeming) approach-
ment, there are four kinds of conflicts, as stated by Pardcara
and other sages, to wit, cleaving (1. occultation), grazing,
clashing of the rays, and passing southward.!

4. At the occurrence of an occultation the rains will fail
and discord prevail among friends and powerful families.
When planets graze one another, there is danger from the
sword, dissension amongst royal councillors, and dearth.

5. At a clashing of the rays there will be war between
kings, and desolation by sword, disease, and famine. Like-
wise there will be hostile encounters between monarchs at the
planetary conflict termed passing southward.*

* Utpala: चच दुथमयेक इक लस्सते स भेदः। अधःसेनोर्व्मग्प्डा-
श्यत इति यावत्‌ + यच हस्त ग्रहेश विम्बपरिधिसंसरशंः क्रियते ख
तुशेखः + अंशवो रष्मयशेषामसुनां परस्परं मदनं । भेरोशैखन्यतिरे-
कैयास्रयोयंहयोः परसरं रद्मयः संयुक्ता ्याहन्यमाना इव eT
WS zTASTT b Cl. comment. on Sirya-siddbinta, vil. 18, seq. The
epasavyem or asavyam yuddhem takes place, when the interval is some-
what less than a degree; at a greater interval there is ne conflict at all.
This statement of the Sirya-siddh. is more explicit than our author's;
yet it is clear that the essvyem or epasavyam in this chapter Is that kind
of conflict which occurs at the greatest Interval allowable. About the
words apasevya and asavye, see next note.

* Utpala says: WORN "प्रदविय ख्यते । समं छला द्विलोशरा-
वद्छानमपसग्यमुष्छति । आचार्येश चद्रपरहसमायमे "पसणखचं छतं

(>. रूण. 8) अचिभि फणमुदकखे यद्वहस्ोपदिषटं weft aque

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 106] =====
104

6. The Sun, when standing in the meridian, is (compared
to) an ally coming to the rescue; when in the east, he is
(like a king) staying in town; in the west, he is (a king)

marching off. Mercury, Jupiter, and Saturn are always —

staying in town, and the Moon is always an ally.

खर्वमेव प्रतीपम्‌ इति । अमुभेवार्थ॑मु षिपुच आह । दविधेनापसम्बं खा-
दुकरेख प्रददिदम्‌। यहालां चद्रमा जेयो weerat atereg sy This
# ०० difficalt to understand, for the moon leaving, in ber eastward
coarse, a planct or star at ber own right (i.e. standiag north from the
planet or star), may be sald to make a predakshine ; standing to the
seath, i.. leaving a planet or star at her left, she makes an epasavys.
Thus epessvye means “from the left, at the left,” and, in a special
application, “at the south side ;” but from this it does not necessarily
follow that epasavye originally was simply the opposite of savys, “left.”
Yet it cannot be doubted that they have taken epassvye as the reverse
of savye, or, in other words, that eps was understood to mean, not
“from, frem the side,” but “net ;” therefore.csavys was considered to
be simply synonymous with epasavys. Moreover, sevya has got the

mesaing of “ right,” precisely the reverse of its most common accepta- .

tea, vis. “left.” Savye, “right,” eg. from hands, arms, etc., as oppo-
site to ofme, “ left,” occars, eg. in Brh. Sanh. li. 41; asavye, “left,”
43. Savye, “right,” also in Riajacekbara’s drama of Balarimiyapa,
Act 1. 83 (ed. Govinda Deva): IRCTSS Fara wafaafaca: पा-
जिभमिः के्वन्धान्‌ सथिरग्यावद्रस्रपरदयनपटुमिग्ष्किब्दतः कष्ठपीटीः।
Also in the same Act, 47 and 50. Not to be confounded with this
acceptation of sevya is its use In augury. Applied to’augural birds,

ete., savys is strictly and properly “left,” but as birds frst appearing _

from the left of the observer move in the direction of his right, and

keep him at their own right, sevys, “left,” and predakshina, “moving ,

to the right,” imply the same, without being the same. Utpala remarks:
wd we aged) wyiriiean wae दकिणपा्चैणा-
मन्ति जत्‌ तत्‌ परदिव सन्ध । एतदिपरीतं दचिवपाश्चाद्रामपा-
ष WE ATITA | Te astronomical works Way“ moving (revolv-
ing) toward the right,” and WG “moving toward the left,” is
common cncugh ; ¢.g. Sirya-siddb. xil. 55; Siddh. Ci Goltdhy. 3,
81; Aryabbattya Iv. 16: इषाः पमि ordered ermrerel
अपदन्धनं तथां ददिशवडवारुखे प्रिताः ॥ ०८ wow ia B. and R,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 107] =====
105

7. Ketu, Mars, Rahu, and Venus are marching planets.
All the planets, when hurt, destroy, severally, ‘kings coming
to the rescue, marching or staying in town. In case of their
being victorious, they bestow victory also upon those of their.
own class.

. 8. When a stationary planet is overpowered by another
of the same description, then kings keeping the town will
kill others in the same predicament. The Sun produces the
same effects on marching chieftains, and the Moon on allies;
the same applies to stationary and marching planets.

9. A planct is overpome when he is standing south, rough,
quavering, retrograding, small, covered, of unnatural appear-
ance, without brilliancy, and colourless.

10. He is termed victorious when he shows signs the re-
verse of those aforementioned ; also, if he be large, glossy,
and brilliant, in spite of his standing south.

11. Where two planets at their conjunction are radiant,
large, and glossy, there is mutual love; whereas, in the con-
trary case, they destroy those who belong to their own party.

12. If, owing to the indistinctness of the tokens, it cannot.
be made out whether a conflict or a conjunction is taking
place, the effects concerning the potentates on earth are said
to be equally uncertain.

13. When Mars is overcome by Jupiter, the Bahlikes,
chieftains taking the field, and people dependent upon fire,
are vexed; the (irasenas, Kalingas, and Salvas suffer from
Mars being vanquished by the Moon.

14. Should Mars be defeated by Saturn, citizens (and kings
staying in town) are victorious, but the country people cast —
down; should he be so by Venus, granaries,! barbarians, and
knights come to grief.

15. When Mercury is beaten by Mars, trees, rivers, ascetics,
Agmaka-land, monarchs, the Northerners, and persons initiated
for a sacrifice, are to suffer.

1 The comm. explains WYSTATC as WHYWATUTH “a village not
received in fief,” which implies, I suppose, that euch a village is exempt
from tributes. ति

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 108] =====
106

16. In consequence of Mercury being overcome by Jupiter,
the barbarians, (idras, thieves, wealthy men, citizens, Tri-
gartians, and Pirvattyas are vexed, and the earth shakes.

17. If Meroury is quelled by Saturn, shippers, soldiers,
aquatic products, rich men and pregnant women will suffer;
if he is overcome by Venus, fires will rage, and corn, rain-
clouds and marching kings be lost.

18-19. When Jupiter is overpowered by Venus, the Ku-
1ftas, Gandharians, Kaikayas, Madras, Sélvas, Vateas, Vangas,
cows and grain, are destroyed; so are the Middle country,
sovereigns and kine, when Jupiter is defeated by Mars, and
the Arjundyanas, Vasitis, Yuadheyas, (ibis and priests, when
the same is vanquished by Saturn.

20. But should Jupiter be overcome by Mercury, then the
barbarians, trathful persons, swordsmen and the Middle
country, will be ruined, apart from the results following
from what has been stated in Chapter XVI. (v. 41.)

21-22, When Venus is defeated by Jupiter, an eminent
chieftain on march finds his death, discord reigns betwixt
Brahmans and Kshatriyas, and the Rain-god yields no rain;
the Kosalas, Kalingas, Vangas, Vateas, Matsyas, the Middle
country, eunuchs and Q(rasenas, suffer severely.

23. In case of Venus being vanquished by Mars, com- ।

manders of armies will be alain and kings wage war. If
Venus is overcome by Mercury, the Parvatiyas are lost, the
cows yield no milk, and there is but little rain.

24. By Venus being defeated by Saturn, foremen of cor-
porations, military men, Kehatriyas and aquatic beings are
afflicted; moreover, the general effects (taught) in Chapter
XVI. take place.

26. When Saturn is subdued by Venus, the prices rise,

snakes, birds, and proud men will suffer; likewise the coun-
tries of Tankans, Orissa, Kaci and Balkh.
ˆ 26, The Angas, merchants, birds, cattle, and elephants will
saffer, should Saturn be defeated by Mercury; but should he
be eo by Jupiter, then countries where women are predomi-
nating in numbers, the Mahishakas and Scythians, will be
afflicted,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 109] =====
’ ` . वरण

27. Herewith are described the special results of Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn, if worsted. The other
(general) effocts must be determined from Chapter XVI. The
more any planet is stricken, the more he will ruin whatever
belongs to his department. `

 

Onarrzn XVIII.
Conjunction of Moon and Planets or Stars.

` 1, The Moon, when moving more or lees to the north of
the stars or planets, i.e. keeping them at her right side,
brings good to mankind ; going at the outside, she is not
auspicious.

2. If the Moon stands north from Mars, the Parvattyas and
commanders of powerful armies will conquer, knights and
marching kings be cheerful, and the earth rejoice at the mul-
titude of com, `

४. The Moon, when north from her own son (Mercury),
brings victory to chieftains keeping the town, and causes
Plenty, increases the stores of grain, the happiness of the
people, and the treasures of the rulers.

4+ When the Moon stands at the north of J upiter, home-
staying monarchs, Brahmans, Kshatriyas, and scholars will
thrive, as well as justice and the Middle country; there will
be abundance of food, and gladness amongst the subjects,

5. The Moon, in moving north from Venus, makes horses,
elephants, and hoarders of wealth thrive. Then, aleo, chiefs
on-march and warriors will conquer, and the crops prove
most excellent.

* C6. ch. xvil. 5, note, and the following lines:

` तथाच बुच्गर्गः
गथचय्य यहायां वा यदा शुत्तरतः ait)
तत्‌ मदचियमिन्वाऊरभवेत्‌ चेमसुवुष्टये ॥ ग
WATS हालां वा यदा द्चिखतो ब्रवत्‌ । ` - .
अपसन्दं सरव खादवुहिमयखयशम्‌ ॥ .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 110] =====
108

6. Should the Moon leave Saturn at her right, then sove-
reigns keeping the town will triumph, and the Soythians,
Bahlikas, Sindhians, Pablavas, and Yavanas be joyful.

7. The Moon profits those chieftains, whether marching
or not, those things and countries that belong to the domain
of the planet or star to the north of which she happens to
move, provided she be unhurt. The same are crushed by
her, if she stands south.

8. All the effects announced in case of the Moon standing
north from a planet become inverted when she stands south.
Herewith are enumerated the Moon’s conjunctions with stars
and planets; a hostile conflict between the Moon and planets
or stars is wholly out of question."

च

Onarrex XIX.
"The years presided over by each of the Planets, and their results.

1. Everywhere the earth is but scantily covered with corn; ___

the woods are fatally teeming with greedy mordacious® ani-
- mals; in the rivers flows no plenty of water; medicines have
almost lost their power.

2. The Sun is scorching hot, even in the cold season; the
clouds, although huge like mountains, yield not much rain; `
‘the Moon and starry host have lost their lustre; the congre-
gations of ascetics and herds of kine are in dismal condition.

8. Monarchs with irresistible forces, consisting of elephants,
horse and foot, with their followers,’ and with an excellent
* Nevertheless, Vartha-mihira himself speaks, in ch. xvil. 6, of San
and Moon as “an ally coming to the rescue, marching,”ete. Why such
incongruities abound Ia the Sahité has been explained more than once.
Unpala remarks: Ger हिः सह समाजमो "खमयगब्दवाख्यः । भौ"
- मादीनां परस्परं युखशब्दवाश्चः। दग्यखिष्डासर सिदान्तः । धैखो-
ऋमादिष्यस्छ जयपराजयं त बोखवासनावाद्याः ॥

* In the text r. of course, finTafiry.

* Comm. शुपायु्रेः wfehataai@:, Lc. “proviscial governors,

counts.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 111] =====
109

armament of bows, swords, and clube, go about destroying
the lands by war. Such is the state of things in a year, or
month, or day presided over by the Sun.! :

4-6, In the course of a year ruled by the Moon, the sky is
covered with clouds that, showing the dark hue of snakes,
collyrium, and buffalo’s horn, and resembling mountains in
motion, fill the whole earth with pure water and the air with
a deep sound such as arouses a feeling of tender longing.
The water-sheets are decked with lotuses, nympheas, and
water-lilies; the trees are blossoming and the bees hamming in
the parks; the cows yield abundant milk; lovers unoeasingly
delight their delightful paramours by amorous sports;* the
sovereigns rule an earth rich in (flourishing) towns and
mines, in wheat, rice, barley, Kalama rice, and plantations of
sugar-cane, whilst she is dotted with fire-piles, and resounding
with the noise of greater and smaller sacrifices.?

7-9. Most violent fires, aroused‘ by the wind, spread about,
threatening to burn villages, forests, and towns; crowds of `

' This chapter bears a different stamp from those which originally
make part of an Indian Sanhitd, Its subject is treated in the Greek
HorcAstra, but Vardhe-mibira judged it tu belong rather to the Phala-
grantha, i.e. Sanbita. We are informed by Utpala that the author him-
self in a former work (the PancasiddhAntiké ?) bad promised to reserve
the subject of this chapter for the book he intended to write after finish-
ing ४1, त०४: च्चार्येश पूर्वमेव प्रतिच्चातमासति ववं ययय फलं
ara च मुनिप्रणोतमानोष । तत्तदर्थे होरातग््ोत्तरबिघाभे ॥
इति ॥ it is not known which source has been chiefly used by our
author in this particalar instance; thus much, however, is certain, that
long before his time Greek horvecopy had been Introduced ipto India.
Utpala quotes Yavanegvara; WETS UARTT: |

दिवाकराब्टो रणविग्रहोयरचितीञ्चरखीव्रविवस्वरापिः।
अवदमुष्कवययात (?) सदधः प्रचण्छवदरहुगविषाविरोबः 8
* २. रामाः ०००० ० रामाम्‌,
* तथाच यवनेश्वरः । - ~
waa fe: प्ररूढयुष्मो बङ्वर्दवारिः।
रखौषधलेहपटुपरपेवशान्रौ रति्ीमखवर्धनो बः ॥
‘ Preferate WATER to वातोचत. *

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 112] =====
110

men, ruined by the inroads of hordes of robbers and bereft
of goods and cattle, ory “Alack-a-day !”” throughout the land.
The clouds, although bulky in appearance and piled up, yield
nowhere rain in great quantity; the corn may shoot out,
perhaps, at the boundary, but will wither, and even if it grow
up, will be pilfered by others. Kings do not properly attend
to their governing duties, bilious diseases prevail, and snakes
are raging. Such calamities befall the people, whose crops,
moreover, have failed, in a year presided over by Mars.

10-12. Enchantment, magic, jugglers,! mines, townspeople,
singers, writers, arithmeticians, and military men prosper;
monarchs wish to exhibit to each other wonderful and pleasant
shows in order to make friends; business in the world is car-
ried on honestly ; the threefold science of religion is in a per-
feot state, and human justice is duly administered, as if by
Manu himself. Some apply their minds to the knowledge
of the highest Word (and Principle),* or try to attain the
highest rank in the study of logic? To jesters, envoys, poets,
children, eunuche, perfumers, those that live near dikes, water,
and mountains, Mercury brings joy, and to the earth abun-
dance of herbs, in a year or month of his own.

18-15. Continually many eounds emitted by the priests at
the sacrifices go up to heaven, rending the hearts of evil
spirits, but gladdening the gods partaking of the offerings.
The earth is so provided with excellent grain, eo teeming
with elephants, horse and foot, so stored with wealth and
large herds of kine,-and so prosperous owing to the proteo-
tion of her rulers, that her inhabitants seem to vie with the
gods in heaven. The sky is covered with many towering
clouds, that refresh the soil by raining, and the exceedingly
fertile fields produce plenty of corn, in the happy year pre-
aided over by Jupiter.

" ०००. जाचयाविनां WTTHTATAT | इकनालश्चानां freee:
ज्ंणानाम्‌ । शुहकविदानार्थपरदर्धंकानाम्‌।

* 0००. केचिद्ष्वध्वाद्मविद्ासु योगध्रासेषु खाः ।

° 0००. ऋज्वी चिकीषु तर्वविामु, 0८ Vitrytynne on Nytys-Stitra
L1 (p. 8, od. Cale). .

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 113] =====
111

16-18, Earth is decked with rice and sugar-cane, for the
fields are copiously watered by the rain poured from moun-
tain-like clouds; by her numerous tanks adorned with beau-
tiful lotuses, she shines like a woman brilliant with new
ornaments. The rulers of the country destroy their powerful
enemies amidst the numerous cries of victory resounding in
the air. Owing to the protecting care of the kings, the good
rejoice and the wicked are put down' in the kingdoms where
cities and mines are in a flourishing state. At spring-time
there is much sipping, of sweet wine in company with dear
loves, much delightful singing accompanied by flute and lute,
much feasting in company with guests, friends, and kinsfolk,
and Love's shouts of triumph are ringing in a year ruled by
Venus.

19-21. Throughout the course of a year ruled by Saturn the
countries are disturbed by unbridled bands of robbers and by
many battles, and plundered of cattle and goods; the in-
habitants, whose kinsmen have been killed, are sorely crying,
and whole families are heavily tried by disease and hunger.
The sky shows no clouds, as these are chased by the wind;:
the soil is covered with heaps of branches torn off; the beams
of Sun and Moon are invisible in the firmament, concealed by
a dense mass of dust. The reservoirs are without water and
the rivers shallow. In some parts the products of the field
perish from want of rain; in others they get on (only) after
being watered (artificially), as the Rain-god gives but little
rain.

22. If a planet is small, with faint rays, standing in his
lowest mansion, or overcome, he produces no full effect; in
the contrary case, he causes great prosperity. The evil effects
of a month increase in an evil year; the same applies to the
good effects; should the one neutralize the other, then the’
results are trifling.

) ‘The compound uUfyeeqa is irregular, inasmuch as It ought to
` ४ ferreguad. The came irregularity is met with also in Mrechakatt

(p- 10, ed. Stensler), where has the
meaning of THYTUFRTUNST. In both instances gtammar hes
been sacrificed to the exigencies of prosody.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 114] =====
112

Cuarrer XX.
The planetary triangle.

1. In any quarter where all the planets together either
appear or set heliacally, will be danger from the'raging of
the sword, from famine, and calamities.

2. The configurations termed discus, bow, triangle, staff,
town, dart, and thunderbolt, bring famine and drought to
mankind, and promote war.

8, In any quarter where s cluster of planeta is seen at
sunset, there will be another king and great calamity from
foreign hosts. .

4. When planets come together in one asterism, they will
be fatal to the people standing under that ssterism’s influ-
ence,! but auspicious to the same if they shed bright rays and
do rot occult one another.

5. I shall now describe the tokens and effects of the (six)
constellations, called planetary concourse, gathering, tarnish-
ing, meeting, encounter and fellowship." “

6. The conjunction of four or five planets, marching or
stationary, in one asterism, is styled a “concourse.” If com-
bined with a comet or Rahu, it becomes a “ tarnishing.”

7. When a stationary planet comes together with another
stationary planet, or one on merch with another of the same
description, the conjunction is named a “meeting.” When
another scoedes ‘to the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
there is a “ fellowship.” ;

8 One (of two planets in conjunction) rising (helically)
from the south, and the other doing eo from the east, make
an “encounter.” In a “gathering”? the planets are auspi-

® According to eh. xiv. and xv. ,

* Kora, “fellowship,” especially secret fellowship, er the Germ:
Broderechaft, aloo Rijatarangig! 5, 295 ; plcakestp are those whe hare
dreak the cup of secret fellowship.

® "The definition is simply omitted. Utpala: URat TaTHt UeT-

जागाममाये यो यहसंयोगः ख अहसमागमं इति जेषः ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 115] =====
118
cious if they be large, resplendent, and natural in appear-

ance.

9. The constellations termed “concourse” and “gathering” -
are indifferent; “tarnishing” and “fellowship” are danger-
ous to the people; the “meeting” is said to be good middling;
but at “encounter” one may with certainty expect the raging
of hostilities. र

0ष+लण्ठ इदा.
Pregnancy of the Clouds.

1. Since food is the world’s life and dependent upon the
rains, the setting in of the rainy season deserves to be care-
fully investigated

2. Having read the works composed by Garga, Pardcara,
Kacyapa, Vatsya,! and other sages, in which the symptoms
of the future setting in of the rains are described, I now pro-
coed to treat this subject.

3. The prediction of an astrologer who day and night’
attentively watches the signs of the pregnancy of the clouds,
will prove true like that of a sage, when he determines the
fall of rain.

4. Indeed, is there any science that could surpass this,
by knowing which one becomes a seer of past, present, and
fature, even in this time of perdition, the Iron Age?

5. Some® say that the days of pregnancy begin after the
end of the light half of Karttika. This, however, is not the
opinion of the majority. I will tell Garga’s opinion.

6. In the (first) days after the first of the light half of
Margagtrsha, or at the time of the Moon’s conjunction with
Parva-Ashidhé (after that date), the symptoms of the preg-"
nancy of the clouds ought to be observed. -

* Another reading has Vajra. = =

* 0०००. लिद्धसेनादयः + तथाच खिद्धसेनः

शुकपवमतिक्म्य कार्तिक विचारथेत्‌। :
ब्मालां सद्व सम्बष्‌ सद्डसम्पन्तिकारकम्‌। =“

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 116] =====
114

7. The foetus formed during the Moon’s stay in a particular
asterism will be born 195 natural days hence, the Moon
standing again in the same asterism, according to the laws
of her revolution.

8. The fatuses of the light half come out in the dark half,
those of the dark in the light half, those of day-time at night,
of night at day-time, of evening twilight at dawn, of dawn
at twilight.

9. The fostuses from Margactrsha and the light half of
Pausha are of little consequence. The dark fortnight of
Pausha corresponding to the time of conception, the light
half of Crdvaya may be fixed upon as the period of birth.

10. The fostuses from the bright half of Magha are born in
the dark fortnight of Cravana. The former part of Bhadra-
peda may be fixed upon as the period of birth corresponding
to the dark half of Magha.

11. The fostuses conceived during the bright fortnight of
Philguna are to come out in the latter half of Bhidrapada
but those from the dark fortnight are bern in the former half
of Agvayuja.

12. The fostuses from the light fortnight of Agvayuja will
be produced as rain in the dark half of Acvayuja; those
cpming into existence during the dark part of Oaitra fall
down as rain in the light half of KArttika.! -

18. The cloud embryos formed in the eastern quarter will
issue in the west, those formed in the west will issue in the
east. In like manner the other directions and the winds
are reversed (at the two periods compared). :

14. (Good symptoms, generally, are:) A refreshing soft
breeze from the north, north-east or east; a clear sky ;
San or Moon surrounded by a sleek, bright, and thick halo.

16, A sky covered with large, bulky, smooth or needle-

‘were wh: ।
आथेन मवयं विन्यात्रमस्तं फाण्णुनेन तु ।
Qrarage migra तु कार्तिकम्‌ ॥

गुकपचेद छष्यना छष्धपयेख चेतरम्‌।
राचाद्रोख विपथाखः ard: कालविनिखये ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 117] =====
115

like, stratified red clouds, or such as show the hue of crows’
eggs or a peacock’s neck, when the Moon and Stars are
shining brightly. ^

16. A rainbow, rumbling of thunder, lightning, a mock
sun, beautiful twilight, troops of birds and wild deer emit-
ting auspicious sounds from the north, north-east, or east;

17. The planets large, beaming brightly, moving at the
north (of the asterisms) and unhurt; trees with shoots un-
impaired; men and quadrupeds merry :

18. Such are the ‘general symptoms announcing the pro-
sperous development of all rain-embryos. There are, how-
ever, some epecial rules arising from the particular nature
of the season, which I am about to propound forthwith.

19. (Good symptoms are :) In the months of Margacirsha :
and Pausha a red glow of the horizon at morn and evening,
clouds and halos, not too severe a cold in Margactrehs, and
not too much snow in Pausha.

20. Happy tokens in Magha are: a strong wind, a sun
or moon dim by hoar frost, great cold, and a sun rising or
setting with clouds. `

21. In Philguna are auspicious: a rough, violent gale,
thick clouds showing a smooth surface, halos broken off, and
@ russet or red sun.

22. In Caitra footuses forming among wind, clouds, rain
and halos are of good augury; in Vaicikhs, such as are
attended with clouds, wind, rain, lightning, and thunder are
favourable.

23. Clouds that at the period of embryo formation show
the colour of pearl or silver, or the hue of Tamal, blue lotus
or collyrium, or those that resemble aquatic animals, contain
copious rain.

24. Clouds shone upon by sharp sunbeams and riding on °
a soft breeze will, at the time of birth, pour out water, as if
with a vengeance,

` 26, 26. The signs of the miscarrying of the fwtuses are
meteors, thunderbolts, dense dusk, red glow of the quarters,
earthquake, Fata Morgans, opaceous wedges (appearing oa
the Sun’s disc), comets, planetary war, tornados,’ a porten-

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 118] =====
116

tous rain of blood or the like, a cloudy bar crossing the Sun’s
diso, a rainbow, an eclipse: by these and similar portents of
three kinds! an embryo gets destroyed.

27. Signs precisely the reverse of those, both general and
special for any particular season, by which the growth of an
embryo is assured, produce the contrary results.

28. A fotus commencing its development at (the Moon’s
standing in) the first and second Bhadrapadé, first and
second Ashidh& and Rohint, in whatever season it may
happen, will yield much rain.

29. An embryo formed at Catabhishaj, Aclesha, Ardra,
Svati and Magha is said to occasion fertility for many days,
if unimpared ; but it will be disastrous, if hurt by portents
of three kinds.

30. Fostuses coming into being at (the Moon’s conjunction
with) one of the aforesaid asterisms during the months of
Margagireha, Pausha, and the four following, will produce
rain (after 195 days) for eight, six, sixteen, twenty-four,
twenty, and three days severally. `

81. If the asterism is occupied by.an evil plandt, theem- =` `

bryos will result in hail, thunderbolts, and rain of fishes;
but if the Sun or Moon be in conjunction with or looked at
by a benign planet, in copious showers.

82. Too much rain, without apparent cause, at the forming
of fostuses, tends to their destruction ; if the quantity of rain
fallen (as measured in a basin used for the purpose) * exceeds
an eighth of a Drona, the fostus gets dissolved.

83. If a fostus, prosperous in other respects, is, at the time
of birth, prevented from producing rain in consequence of
planetary and other evil influences, it will (afterwards) give
rain mixed with hail, and that at the eame period as when
it first developed.

34. As the milk of the milch cow grows hard, if retained.
† too long, 00 does the water, kept back beyond its time.

35. An embryo, if attended with five phenomena,’ will
* Te wit, celestial, atmospheric, and terrestrial ; ef. ch. x1.2; xlvi.2.

® Gee ch. xiii. 2.

* Vis, wind, rain, lightalng, thunder, and clonds ; see ver. 37.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 119] =====
117

extend its rain over a hundred yqjanae, and for every pheno-
menon less, over half the extent of the former,! but, if it has
only one concomitant, over five yYanas around.

86. The quantity of rainfall will at the season amount to
& Drops (in basin measure), if the embryo has five concomi-
tants; three Adhakas are the results of wind, six of light-
ning, nine of clouds, twelve of thunder.

87. An embryo has five concomitant signs, if it developes
amidst wind, rain, lightning, thunder, and clouds. Such a
one brings much rain.. One which at the time of formation
loses too much water, produces at the period of birth a
drizzling rain.*

 

Cuarrern XXII.
Pregnancy of the Air.

1. The eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh days of the bright
half of Jyaishtha are the days of the air’s pregnancy, which
are auspicious if the breeze is gentle and favourable, and the
sky covered with smooth clouds.

2. Should it rain during those days at (the Moon’s con-

* Consequently, fifty, twenty-five, and twelve and a half yojanes.

» 84१००, in hin comment on Rg Veda 1, 6, 4२. खधामनु
पुनरमर्मलमेरिरे। दधाना भाम यश्चियम्‌ ॥ alludes to the formation
ef rain-embryos in explaining geréhatoam erire by meghamadhye
JSelasya gerbhdktram Preritaventeh. For eliciting this meaning he
mast have recourse to the quite fanciful and unwarrantable supposition
that erire implies, though not formally expresses, a causative sense.
Bat It is sufficiently clear that gerbhatcam er is oaly a variation of such
common expressions as garbhatoam dy#, gam, dped, or yf, gam, or
upayd, xpagam, etc. Gerbhateam erire 19, according to Eoglish idiom,
simply, “ they became gerdhas.” The Maruts become gardhas again, in

"ether words, “retire to thelr place of birth” (mythologically, Prigal’s
womb, ¢.g. R. V. 6, 68, 3), or “disappear.” The whole verse in English

Ist “And after they disappeared again of their own accord, rendering

thelr mame to be revered.”

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 120] =====
118

junction with) Svati, Vigkha, Anurddh& and Jyeshthd, then
the rain-embryos,! melting away, are lost for the months of
CrAvans, BhAdrapada, Agvayuja and Karttika, successively.

8. The four days mentioned are lucky if uniform, but
bode no good if varying, in which latter case they are stated
to bring danger from robbers. Let me quote the following
stanzas of Vasishtha’

. “Such days of pregnancy as are accompanied by light-
ning, trickling drops, masses of dust and wind, the Sun and
Moon being overcast, contain in them the germs of happiness.

5. And when most splendid flashes of lightning keep near
the good regions (viz. north, north-east, and east), then also
the discriminating obeerver may announce the prosperous
growth of all products of the field:

6, 7. A rain of dust and water; gentle motions of young
children ; good-sounding notes of birds and their frolicking
in dust, water and the ‘like; halos, sleek and not too much
impaired, round the Sun and Moon : from euch signs is to be
anticipated with certainty a (future) rain promoting the
growth of all products of the field. .

8. If the clouds are sleek, compact and tending to tarn
from east to south, there will be a plenteous rain, causing
the full development of all crops.”

Caarrern XXIII.
Prognostice for the Quantity of Rainfall.

1. From the quantity of rain falling at (the Moon’s con-
junction with) Parva-Ashadhi, etc., directly after the day of
fall moon of Jyaishtha, should bo told by the experts the

' Dhérapt, agreeably to its grammatical form, properly means

“bearing” and “womb,” but in the same manner as recand, properly

* « composing,” has got the passive notion of “ composition,” so dhérané

may have been taken in the passive sense of “ what is borne.” In no

ether way can I account for its construction with perieruta, which applies

alse to receptacles, wombs; but in this instance dAérapé hardly denotes
that which contains the embrys.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 121] =====
119

quantity of water (to be expected) during the rainy season,
along with the good or evil omens.

2. The quantity of water must be determined by taking a
basin, a Aceta (cubit) in diameter, for hydrometer. Fifty
Palas are equal to one Adhaka, by which standard the water
that has fallen is to be measured.

3. The prognostication of the quantity of rain is to begin
as soon as there has been rain sufficient to make impressions
in the soil! or leave drops on the grass sprigs.

4. Some say (that the measure is to be taken), whatever
may be the extent of land rained upon ;* others propose a
region of ten yoyanas around ;* the opinion of Garga, Vasish
tha and Pardgara is that the circle shall be one of twelve
yQYanas at the utmost.‘

5. Generally it will rain again (in the season) at (the
Moon's conjunction with) that same particular asterism
(POrva-Ashadhé, etc.), at which some (previous) rain has
been falling. If it does not rain at Porva-Ashddha and the
rest, there will be no rain at all (during the season). -

+ In the printed text WFCWT Is erroneously separated from HRT (i.

मुद्राः
° ४१८० क्ेचिषमुनयः काश्पप्रभुतयो चथामिवुष्टं यावन्तावन्धाषं

वुं कथयन्ति । प्रवरदकाजे यथातथेकखित्रपि प्रेषे गुहे वषाकाके
भोभनं वधै पुधाषाढादिग्राह्मम्‌ | were area:

प्रवर्त यथारे शं वर्षं चदि दषते ।

वथाकानं समासाय वासवो बड़ वर्ति ॥

° ०००. अन्वि देवादयः । प्रव्शकाजे दथयोजगके वु वाकाश
"्बुकथनं (५ ४5 qnantity of rain to be announced for the ralsy season”)
arargufata | ware Fra: .
अवर्षे यदा वुं द्योजनमष्छनम्‌ ।
वषपाकाशं समासाय वासवो ax wife a

‘ were aa:
अवाडादिषु वुषटेषु योजनद्रादश्राव्मके। _
`. मवुषटे भोभने व वपाकालं विनिरदिेत्‌ः+

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 122] =====
120

6-9. The quantity of rain at the asterisms Hasta, Pirva-
Bhadrapadd, Mrgaciras, CitrA, Revatt and Dhanishtha is
stated to be (normally) 16 Dronas; at Catubhishaj, Jyeshtha
and Svati 11; at Kyttika 10; at Cravana, Magh4, Anurfdhd,
Bharapt and Mile 14; at Pirva-Phalguni 25; at Punar-
vasa 20; at Vicdkhé and Uttara-Ashadha 20; at Acleshé 13 ;
at Uttara-Bhadrapadé, Uttara-Phalguni and Rohit 25; at
Pfrva-Bhadrapadé and Pushya 15; at Agvint 12; at Ardré
18 Drogas, provided all these asteriams are free from baneful
influences.

10. The asterism being vexed by the Sun, Saturn, a comet,
or hurt by Mars, or portents of three sorts, there will bo no
weal, nor rajn; but good will ensue, if the same is in con-
junction with a benign planet and unscathed.

Onarrzn XXIV.
The Moon's Conjunction with Rohini.

1-8, On the top of the mountain where the gods have
their abode, the parks of which- resound with the humming
of the bees upon the blossoms of the trees grown in the dells
of the golden hills, and ring with the bustle of many birds

and the sonorous notes of the song of Heaven's nymphs,—"

there it was that Brhaspati told the matters concerning the
Moon’s conjunction with Rohini. Having duly taken cog-
nizance of them, as well as of those taught by Garga, Pard-
gare, Kicyapa and Maya to the crowds of their pupils, I
shall attempt to treat of the same subject in a (comparatively)

4. It is by observing Rohini in conjunction with the
Moon in the dark half of AshAdha, that the astrologer must
predict weal or woe, scoording to the teachings of authorita-
tive works. .

€. How a future conjunction can be foretold has been
shown by me in my Treatise under the head of “ Conjuno-
tion with Fixed Stars.” The practical results, however, must
be eet forth as deduced from the Moon's (apparent) size,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 123] =====
19

brightness, colour, road, and also from omens and the direo-
tion of wind.

6, 7. The divining Brahman, going to a spot north or
east from the town, staying there three nights,’ attentive to
the holy fire, is to draw a diagram of the planets and cluster
of asteriams, and worsbip them by oblations with incense and
flowers. He must occupy the sacred plot strewn with sacri-
ficial grass, and adorned, at the four quarters, with veesels
kept clean, and not blackened at the bettom, filled with gems,
water, and herbs, and covered above with sprouts of trees.

8. After taking all sorts of seeds, while delivering the
Mahfvrata prayer, and putting them in a pot, he must im-
merse them in the water mixed with sacrificial grass and
gold. Thereupon an offering with prayers to the Maruts,
Varuna and Soma (i.e. the Moon).*

9. He should prepare a thin, black streamer, four hastas
(cubits) long and three times as much raised above the
ground. Having first ascertained the precise direction of
the quarters, he should by means of that instrument observe
the wind during the Moon’s conjunction. `

10. For prognostics of the rains, the watches (} of the day)

ought to be counted as corresponding to as many half-months,
' The comm. Sntimates that trychoshite im ferws
खितस्वचच छतोपवासः । तथाच यर्म ~ ^
भगरादपनिष्कम्य दिशं प्रायुष्तरां fe: |
fafa ware 22 देवतायतने -पिवा ॥
रचा नियुक्लो शेवच्चः ठतश्यीयो faRferer:
निमिन्तकु्लो धीरः मुकताम्बरखमावुतः।
खपवासमधातिशेदषटमीं संभ्रितबतः ॥
ततो "म्बाः परे यस्िष्दिने सयुष्यते अथी ।
प्राजापिनच ततो निमित्तानुपलचयेत्‌ §
` १ प° Comm. mentions a r. YYSTQERT®, which cannot be but a
superficial innovation by some one whom the construction struck as very

abrupt. The common r. is undoubtedly right, because a prayer te the
Marats may not be omitted from the ceremony. . ठ ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 124] =====
122

and the subdivisions of a watch as answering to days.' The
wind when tending to veer round from east to south is
favourable. A wind is “steady” if it is constant.

11, As for those seeds kept in the waterpot, such as have
sprouted at the end of the conjunction will grow prosper-
ously, and that for such a part only as has sprouted.

12. The ‘air resounding with the cries of tranquil (i.e. not
vexed) birds and animals, a clear sky and a favourable wind,
are blessed signs at the Moon’s conjunction with Rohint.
Forthwith I will tell the effects of the clouds and wind.

18. Big clouds that, resembling snakes, some of whom
are coiled, others showing only their bellies, others again their
backs,? appear somewhere spotted, elsewhere white, at other
places again dark, while surrounded by glittering flashes of
lightning which cover the heavens.

14, Or the sky is studded, as it were, with variegated clouds
fair as the calix of the expanded lotus and tinged at the outer ©
edges by the gleam of the morning sun, or showing the dark
lustre of bees, saffron, the blossom of Butea frondosa. . -

15. Or the firmament is occupied by gloomy clouds and
illumined at the same time by flashing lights and a rainbow,
as if it were a forest that, crowded with elephants and
byffalos, stands in full blaze.

16. Or the canopy is shrouded by clouds bearing likeness
to mounds of collyrium or imitating the brightness of snow,
pearl, museel-shells and moonbeams.

1 Le. the wind being favourable during the first watch, rain will fall
during the first half of Crivaga; in the contrary case, there will be no
rain during the same period; and so (गध. यस्िन्रहोराचे रोहिष्णा

खह च्म युज्यते तच सूर्योदयात्प्भूति प्रथमं प्ररं यावष्डोभनगो
जातो बहति । तदा जवस प्रथमपषं देवी वर्धति। असुभे वति -ना-
gfeete वाह्या । एवं दितीयपरपहरे शोमने वाते वहति aS
दितीषं बधं वर्धति । तृतीये भाद्रपदस्ञ प्रथमप्म्‌ इ०अ० । परहरेय
अदि वचं तत्‌ प्रहराभेन सक्त खाधानि दिनानि । अहरवतुमायिष पा-
ोगाभि चलार्येवमादि ॥ ।

® The belly of the snake is fair, the back dark.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 125] =====
123

17. Or it is decked with clouds dark like Tamdl or bees,
and comparable to elephants, having lightning for golden
girdles, (white) cranes for prominent tusks, trickling rain for
frontal juice, the moving extremities for trunks, the vari-
coloured rainbow for a banner erected by way of ornament.!

18. And also when heaps of clouds, in a sky tinged red by
the gleam of dawn and twilight, show the deep hue of blue
lotuses, or when they appear to have appropriated to them-
selves the lustre of Hari (the Sun) clad in yellow.

19. If clouds with (alternately) deep and sharp sounds
that blend with the cries of peacocks, citaka-birds, and frogs,
stretch all over the sky, hanging down to the horizon, they
will pour on the earth a flood of rain.

20. If the heavens are occupied by a multitude of such-
like clouds as described, during three days, or two, or one
day, there will be plenty of rain, abundance of food, and
gladness among mankind.

21, Neither good nor rain is to be expected from clouds
rough, small, shattered by the wind, noiseless, and resembling
camels, crows, spectres, monkeys, or other sinister creatures.

22, The Sun darting fierce rays in a cloudless sky brings
rain ; 80, too, a nightly canopy bright with stars like a lake
that, abeunding in white lotases, shines in fall bloom.

28. Clouds coming up from east make the field products
ripen; those which arise from south-east cause the raging of
fires; by those which come from the south, the corn is
ruined; by clouds issuing from south-west, the prices go
down ;* clouds which originate in the west bring a choice rain.

24. Clouds looming up from the north-west result in a rain
seconded by a strong wind, and that only here and there
a thick rain follows upon clouds in the northern region
exceedingly good corn may be expected from clouds gathering
to the north-east. The wind, too, in the different quarters,

.produces similar results.
25. Falling meteors, lightning, thunderbolts, red glow of
* Comm. waftuae गुपयजानां भवति । व

® Comm. r. WU “ half,” vis. of the crops, which r. seems preferable.’

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 126] =====
1%

the horizon, tornados, earthquakes, and sounds of wild deer
and birds, should be observed, as well as the clouds. `

26. The water-jars spoken of before, placed north, east,
¢te., and marked with the names (of the quarters), foreshow
the months of (ravans, Bhadrapada, and so forth. If ajar
proves full, the month denoted by it will yield rain ; if empty,’
there will be'no rain; if diminished in volume of water, one
must make a calculation in proportion.

27. By means of water-vessels marked with the king’s
name, and others marked with the names of the quarters,
should be foretold the fortunes (of the king and members of
the four classes), in proportion to the pots being broken,
empty, diminished, or quite full,

28, If the Moon, while standing on the northern road,
either far off or near, makes her conjunction with Rohini,
one may decisively announce nothing but woe to mankind
in every way.

29. If the Moon, trenching on Rohint, moves northward,
there will be a good rain, but, at the same time, numerous
disasters. By entering into conjunction from the northward,
without touching, she produces plenteous rain and blessing.
. 80. Should the Moon take her stand in the midst of Rohint’s

wain,’ men, having no drink but water from sun-heated
vessels, and rendered helpless, run about, the little children
begging them for food.*

81, If Rohini goes after‘ the Moon-god just rising, then
good ensues, and maidens, love-sick, wholly yield to their
lovers’ power.

82, Should the Moon-god follow Rohini from behind (i.e.
from the west), like a wooer his dear love, then men, wounded
by Cupid's shafts, will stand under the sway of womankind.

} WY In the text fs, of course, » misprint for WR.

* Bee ch. ix. 25, footnote.

* This means, in common prose, that there is drought, aad in conse-
quence thereof hard times.

‘ Le. if Rohiyt at the Moon’s rising is seen at the west side. Comm.

पुषटलः पचचाद्रोहिदी एति गच्छति खमुदेति।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 127] =====
126

83. When the Moon stands south-east from Rohint, there
is to be great calamity; when south-west, the products of
the field, smitten by land-plagues, are lost; when north-west,
the gathering of grain is middling; when north-east, there
are to be many advantages, good growth of the products
-higher prices fetched, and the like.

34. It may happen that the Moon touches the junction star,
or that she screens it by herdiso, At the former contingency
they assert the peril to be dreadful; at an occultation, the
king is killed by his wife.

35. If at the time of the cows coming home, a bull, or even
any black beast,! takes the lead, there will be much rain; if
the animal be black and white, the rain is middling in
quantity; and if white, there will be no rain at all. A
proportionate estimate (of rain to be expected) is to be made
with cattle of other colours.

86. If the Moon, when in conjunction with Rohint, is not
seen in the overclouded sky, great danger from sickness is
_ imminent, but, at the same time, the earth will be provided
with plenty of water and grain. . `

 

0ष^+लषड उष.
The Moon's Conjunction with Sodts. .

1. The same effects as at the conjunction with Rohint has |
the Moon’s conjunction with SvAti and Ashidhé, which all of
them ought to be observed in the bright half of the month of
Ashadhs. How far there is a difference, I am now going to
set forth. .

2. If it rains in the first part (terce) of night (daring the
Moon’s stay) in Svati, all field products will thrive; if in the
second part, sesamum, beans, peas; if in the third, there will
be summer corn, but no autumnal growth, ॥

8. Rain falling during the first part of the day produces
excellent rain (for the future) ; that which comes in the .
seoond part brings the same, but insects and makes too.

+ ००००५ कानादिकः.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 128] =====
126

Moderate rain will result from rainfall during the last part.
If it rains both day and night, there will be (afterwards) an
4. There is a star due north of Citr4 (Spica Virginis), called

Aptspvates! The conjunotion with Svati taking place when `

the Moon is not far from the said star, is beneficial.

5. If on the seventh day of the dark half of Magha snow
falls, the Moon standing in SvAti, or if the wind is vehement,
or a rainy cloud is incessantly rumbling; or if the heavens,
wherefrom sun, moon, and stars, have disappeared, are
scattered over with garlands of lightning, one may be sure
that the rainy season will be rich in all sorts of crops, so as
to gladden the country people.

(6. In the same manner one must consider the Moon’s con-
junction with Svati, when occurring in the month of Phal-
gana, Ositra, or dark half of Vaicdkha, and particularly in
Ashadha.]

Onarren XXVI.
The Hoon's Conjunction with Ashadhd.

1. At the time of fall moon in AshAdha, some seeds, weighed
in equal portions, should be kept fora night.* Such seeds as
prove the next day to have increased will thrive; such as
have diminished will not flourish. The spell used as in-
- eantation to the balance is as follows. .

2. “To be praised by the spell is Sarasvatt,* the truthful
goddess. Thou shalt show the truth, O truthful goddess!
for true are thy decrees

3. As infallibly as Bun and Moon, planets and hosts of

1 From this statement, compared with Sirya-siddbinta vill. 21, we
mast lafer that Apispvates (i.¢. the Little one of Apas) is the small star
“between Bplen Virginis and { Virginis (Apes) The maps consulted by
me show the star, but no indicatory letter. TH Van ganee

‡ 0०० खधिवाखितानि महातरतेन मन्तेदाभिमन्व्य राकिभेकासु-
वितानि।

_ * Sarasvat! or Vic is net only word, speech (Lat. eratie) personified,
but also oracle (oreculum). Cf. xivil. 96; lxxxviil. 42.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 129] =====
127

stars, in this world, rise in the east and go a-setting in the
west, `

4. May aleo now appear the Truth, that Trath which is
in all the Vedas, in the Brahmanas, in the three worlds!

5. Thou art Brahma’s daughter, and celebrated as the child
of Aditi, and thou art also of the family of Kacyaps, thou,
far-famed under the name of Tulé!”!

6. Each of the two soales* should be of linen cloth, six
digits long and wide, fastened with four strings. The strings
are ten digits long, and the cord by which the balance is
held* in the midst of the two scales only six digits. ,

7. In the southern scales must be laid gold and in the
‘northern one the other substances, as well as water. Water
from wells, streams and lakes indicate (in prognostication)
little, moderate and excellent rain, (severally).*

8. Elephants are indicated (in prognostios) by ivory;

1 It is mot clear by virtue of what fanction Sarasvattis identified with the
Balance, Maybe that Sarasvatt in older times had the attribates of the
Greek goddess Themis. To explain the cosmical fanction of the goddess
is no less difficalt, Since TulA (i.e. an attribute or part, exsa, of Seras-
vatt) le the daughter of Aditi (ie. Not-light), and of the family of
Kacyapa (i.e. Crepuscalum), she may denote the horizon, the limit be-
tween day and night; hence the words in v. 3. About Aditi and Kac-
yapa, cf. preface. to the text, p. 41. I will add here that Aditi is the
same Idea as in the later Sanskrit edyshfa, the unseen, highest power
or eternity. Tt Is a general rule that the “unseen” is higher than the
“visible,” the latter being only a part (enge) of the former. ‘Therefore
Krehge is higher than Arjun, though both are essentially the same
and inseparable. / *

* Le, the receptacles wherein the things to be weighed are put.
Comm: we faratin zante Uther aferereTeTt |

* Comm, GUTTER VENTS |”

° ९०००. तथाच पराशरः

Ica "असि सष्यागां राचचाघ्च विवयो -धिके ।
जारेचे मध्यमा सम्पत्‌ कनीयखवटोदके ॥
अद्तां दिभि भवेष्याखमब्डानं शुचिगन्धवत्‌ । :
wet. fefy franfrargrat figrerrrerer a":

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 130] =====
128

cows, horses and the like by hair from the same animals;
kings by gold; Brahmans, Keshatriyas, etc., as well as
countries, years, months, quarters of the horizon, by wax.
" Other substances point only to their own sort. —-

9. The very best balance is one made of gold; one of silver
is middling. In case these are not procurable, one should
make one from’ Acacia Oatechu, or from a shaft by whom a
man has been wounded. The measure is a span (=12 digits.)

10. Such substances as, being weighed, prove to have
diminished in weight, will be lost; such as have increased
will thrive ; such as continue in the same condition will but
indifferently come on.' This is called the mystery of weigh-
ing with the balance,* which one may apply also at the
Moon’s conjunction with Rohint.

11. Evil planets standing in SvAti Ashadh& or Rohint,
are mischisvous. If an intercalary month (intercalary
AshAdhs) is the cause that there are two conjunctions, one
should, after devotional fasting, observe both conjunctions

12. If all three conjunctions point to the same results, one
may confidently predict the latter ; in.the contrary case, how-
ever, the influence of Rohint must be stated as being pre-
dominant.

1. Accordingly as the wind happens to be east, south-
east, south, and so forth (during the conjunction with

1 Utpala: ary wa:
५ थच प्रथमत खारं तै मवन्तिव तां समाम्‌ ।
येषा हीयते खारं तेषा नां विनिर्दिेत्‌ ।
. खमानि तु खमानि श्ुखुखया तुखितानि तु ।

** This hese, or rather keche, is derived from Kush, kushpéti, In the

oense of nishkarshe, 1.0.“ to weigh.” In the Dhitamanjart (ed. Bombay,
1865), the example given ia: WeaTfa AY AGATC: with the deriva-
tive STE: ०८ 8.०० B. Skr. Dict. under GY, अगुकुव्‌ = अनुतूजयति

०22 अवकुष्‌ = अवतुखयति. Appareatly a different word is Kors,

deche, “ the interior of something, calice, case,” which is etymologically
identical with Eaglish house, whence follows that the orthography and
prenunclation hope, though Vedic, is as far removed from the original
form as gvecure, cuohke, etc, , `

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 131] =====
, 129
‘AshadhA), the consequences are (successively): good harvest,
raging of fires, little, middling, good rain, much rain,
seconded by wind, abundant and good rain. -
14, If after the full moon of Ashédha, on the fourth day
of the dark half, at the asterism of Pirva-Bhadrapada, the
-god pours his showers, the rainy season is favourable

otherwise not.

(16. If at full moon of AshAdha there is a north-easterly
wind at the time of sunset, ‘the produce of the crops will be
excellent.)

Cuarren XXVIL
The Wind Circle.

(1. When an easterly wind? blows from heaven, rolling
on, dashing the tops of the eastern ocean’s billows, at the
same time clashing with the dense beams of Sun or Moon,
then one may be sure that the earth, covered by.a roof of
dark clouds extending all around, will abound in autumnal
field products, and her surface be adorned with luxuriant -
vernal® corn. ^

2. When at the period of the conjunction (with Ash&dha)
a south-eastern wind, battering the peaks of the Malaya
mountains,? blows at the time the Day-god. is about to dis-
appear, then the earth, in continual blaze from the flames
sweeping along her surface, emits (as it wére) a heap of
ashes along with the glowing sighs heaving up from her
body. ` : .

8. When at the said conjunction a very rough, blustering -
south wind flutters through the leaves of the corypha, the

awnings of creepers and trees, making the monkeys dance, .
then the clouds, rising with great difficulty, and rabbed as -

1 On the day of fall moon in Asb&dhs, it is to be understood, here
and in the sequel. Lo

* qaat in the printed text is an error for TIM ॥

* An error, committed also by Sabandha, in bis Visavadetta (p.
196, og.)

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 132] =====
130

elephants by the sharp pointe of the Tal,' niggardly yield
but few water-drops.

4. When unremittingly a south-west wind hovers a¢ sun-
eet, tossing up and down in the sea heaps of small cardamoms,
averrhoas and cloves, then the earth, decked by s heavy load
of scattered broken bones of men who have perished by
hanger and thirst, appears wild and restless, like a spouse
maddened by grief at the loss of her husband. -

5. When there isa strong gale from the west about sunset,
stirring every now and anon with heavy squalls, and hurling
up the dust, then tho earth, albeit stored with grain, will
have to sustain the battles of mighty monarchs, and show
everywhere an unbroken row of flesh, fat and blood.

6. If & fall moon in Ash&dha a north-west wind blows `

about the time of sunset, vehement in his course like an
eagle, one may be certain that earth, glad of the briskly-
falling diops of rain, and noisy with the loud sounds of the
frogs, and showing everywhere the brilliant verdure of the
corn-fields, will, for the multitude of pleasures, seem to pos-
eves the fullness of blessings. .

7. And when, at the end of summer, a northerly breeze
is blowing, fragrant with the sweet-scented flowers of Nau-
clea Kadambe, while the sun’s crown of rays is ecreened by
Mount Mera, then the clouds, enraged that by the roaming
flashes of lightning all becomes illuminated, will fill, as in a
fary, the earth with showers, by which the lunar beams are
concealed.

8. When there is a blustrous north-easterly wind, cool,
courted by the gods and scented by the blossoms of Punnig,
agallochum and Périjata, then earth, restored to youthful
vigour by the abundance of water, will have a profusion of
ripe grown corn; the sovereigns will curb their foes and
protect the classes of society with the utmost justice. ]

४ The post quibbles npen téle, “ Borassus flabelliformis,” and “ flap,
ति +

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 133] =====
181

Caarrez XXVIII.
Foretokens of Instant Rain.

1, If in the rainy season the Moon, occupying an aquatio

- asterism! of the ecliptic, at the time of prognostication, is on
the horizon, or, during the bright month-half, in the fourth,
seventh, or tenth mansion, she will presently send forth water,
and that in great quantity, if she be looked at by benign
planets ; in little quantity, if looked at by evil ones. Venus
does the same when under the same circumstances.

2. If the person inquiring touches any wet object or water,
or anything termed after water,‘ or if he standa near water,
or is about to do some humid work, or if at the time of con-
sultation the word “water” is being heard, the inquirer
may be sure that without doubt it is going to rain very
soon. .

8. When the Sun, in the rainy season, dazzling by extreme
splendour, while lingering on the Mountain of Sunrise, shines .
like molten gold or lustrous beryl, he procures rain on the
same day. So, too, when, high in the meridian, he is darting
forth most keen rays.

"4, The water tasteless, the sky coloured like cows’ eyes or
crows’ eggs, the air serene, moisture of salt, calmness of
wind, much tumbling of fishes ashore, repeated oroaking of
frogs, these are tokens of coming rain.

5. Cate strongly scratching the ground with their nails,
rust and a musty smell of iron implements, and dikes made by
children in the high road, announce rain to be approaching.

6. Mountains resembling heaps of collyrium, or their
oloughs wrept in vapour, and halos of the colour of cocks’ .
eyes round the Moon, bring rain:

* Cancer, Capricorn, or Pisces.

* Comm. gives for ०००54 ; सयो सुख्ता अन्बुपालकमिविवमादि।

‘The dictionaries only mention WaqU: Cassia Tora; bet pe and pileke
are synonymous, and therefore interchangeable terms. °

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 134] =====
189

7. Ants shifting their eggs' without mishap, enakes copu-
lating and climbing upon the trees, and cows frisking, are
signs of rain.

8. Rain will fall very soon, when the lizards on the tops

of the trees keep their eyes fixed upon the firmament, and -

cows are looking up to the Sun.

9. If cattle-are unwilling to leave the house, shaking their
ears and hoofs, and similarly dogs, one may state that rain is
about to come down.

10. When dogs are standing on the thatches or look
steadily up to the heavens, or when lightning at day-time
arises from the north-east, the earth’s surface will be levelled
by exceedingly much rain.

* 11, When the Moon is hued like the eyes of a parrot or
dove, or honey-coloured, and when a mock-sun appears in the
aky, then rain will ere long fall from heaven.

12. When there is thunder at night, blood-red and per-
. pendicular lines of lightning at day-time, and a fresh easterly

breeze, rain is at hand.

18. Fall of rain is near, if the shoots of creepers erect
themselves aloft, the birds bathe in water and dust, and creep-

_ ing worms betake themselves to the sprigs of grass.

14. At dawn or twilight clouds showing the same colour
as peacocks, parrots, blue jays or cdtaka-birds, or having
the lustre of roses and red lotuses, and resembling in shape
waves, hills, crocodiles, tortoises, boars, fishes, and piled up
with manifold breaks, yield water within short time.

15. Such clouds also as, being white at the ends like stucco
or moonlight, lustrously black in the middle as collyrium or
‘bees, with many breaks, sleek, trickling, divided in stuirs,
issue from the east and. move to the westward, or after
looming up from the west veer eastward, presently send forth

plenty of rain upon earth.
16. Should there, at the Sun’s rising or setting, be seen a

1 Thes also in Rijatarangigt, vill. 723, where we have to read:
खटी किते गवां बुचमूधारोरेख भोजिनाम्‌ ।
पिपीजकयुशसाष्छोपङ्काक्वैव 8

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 135] =====
133

rainbow, a cloudy crossing bar, a mock-sun, a red line seem-
ing like a fragmentary rainbow,’ and lightning, then sbund-
ant, imminent rain may be predicted. :

[17. If the sky wears the tinge of francolines’ feathers, and
the crowds of birds warble forth merrily at sunrise and sun-
set, day and night, the clouda will pour out rain very soon.]

18. The so-called “unerring” sunbeams,? stretched up-
ward like the hands, as it were, of the Mountain of Sunset,
and clouds sounding hollow as the ground, are important
signs of (instant) rain.

19. If the Moon, during the rainy season, stands in the
seventh mansion from Venus, and is looked at by a benign
planet, or stands in the fifth, seventh, or ninth mansion from
Saturn, there is a tendency to rain.

20. Not unfrequently rain ensues at the planets’ heliacal
rising or setting, their conjunction, and their entering in «
new division,’ or at the end of > half-month, of a half-year,
and certainly at the Sun's staying in ॥

21. Rain falls also at a conjunction of Mercury and Venus,
of Mercury and Jupiter, and of Jupiter and Venus. From
@ meeting of Saturn arises peril from wind and fire, unless
they are looked at by, or in conjunction with, good planeta.

22, When the planets tend to cling‘ to the Sun, forward
or backward,’ then they will make the earth, as it were, one
७69.

 

Prognostics from Flowers and Plants.
1. By observing the prosperous condition of the fruits and
blossoms of trees, one should ascertain the cheapness of sub-
stances, and the good success of the crops. ^

५ © च. मगा. 90.
® See ch. xxx. 11, and ef. ch. xlvil. 90.

. * As mentioned in ch. ix. 10, ogg.

* Le. are about to set hellacally.
* According to thelr motion, belog slow (sear the apris), or swift
(near the conjunction). = ~ ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 136] =====
134

2. From (the floweriness of) the Sil-tree (is to be known
the happy growth of) Kalams-rice; from the red Agoka, red
vice; from the Asclepias,' yellowish rice; from the dark
Asoka, hog’s rice.

3. The Indian fig-tree (thriving), indicates (the growth of)
barley ;* by the ebony tree blossoming, the Shashtika-rice
will grow; from the holy fig-tree one may know the success
of all crops.

4. From rose-apples are inferred sesamum and peas; from
Siriss-flowers is known the full development of panio seed ;
from Bassia, wheat; from Echites, the growth of barley.

_ 6. From Dalbergia and jessamine one may predict cotton ;
from Terminalis, mustard seed; from jujube, Dolichos; from
Karanj, kidney-beans.

6. Linseed may be anticipated from ratan blossoming ;
Paspalum, from the flowers of Butea frondosa; conch-shell,
pearl and silver from the Tilaka-tree; and hemp from Termi-
nalia Oatappe.

7, 8. One may foretell (the cheapness of) elephants from
Ricinus; of horses, from Vatica robusta; of cows, from
Bignonia suaveolens; of goate and sheep from plantains;
gold from the blossoms of Michelia champaks ; plentifulness

coral, from the Pentapetes Phonicea; diamond from the
flourishing state of red Barberia; and beryl from Taberne-
montana.

9. One has to infer pearl from Negundo; eaffron from
Carthamus tinctorius.? By the red lotus is indicated a king;
by the blue one, a minister.

10. Ohief merchants are indicated by the flowers of Bau-
hinia(?); Brahmans by lotuses; court priests by esculent
white water-lilies; generals by the odoriferous water-lily.
Inorease of gold is foreshown by the sunflower (Callotropis).

11. Mangos point to safety; Semecarpus to danger; wal-

1 The Comm. explaine WIFCHT to be ETE.

* Otherwiee the Comm. Way: Wifafete: |

* If we fellow the reading of the Comm., Le. kéruks, we have to
tranclete, “ artioans are Indicated by Carthames.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 137] =====
135

nuts to healthiness; Mimoss catechu and Mimosa albida to
famine; the fruits of Terminalia Arjuna to good rain.

12. The blossoms of Azadirachta and Mesua presage good
times ; wood apples, wind; Barringtonis, danger from drought;
Wrightia, danger from diseases.

18. The blooming of Dab and sacrificial grass bespeaks
sugar-cane; that of the Bauhinia, fires; by the luxuriant
growth of SyAmlaté, courtesans will thrive.,

14. Good rain is generally predicted for any tract of -

country where trees, shrubs and plants show smooth and
unimpaired leaves; whereas, these being rough and impeired,
little rain is predicted.

 

Onarren XXX.
The Signs at Dawn and Twilight,
1. The time during which the stars are indistinct, before

sunrise and after sunset,' is the time of dawn and twilight.®
The signs of it, which produce effects, are the following :

2. Wild deer, eugural birds, wind, halos, mock suns छह

+ moons, cloudy bars crossing the solar orb, tree-shaped clouds,
rainbows, Fata Morgans, peculiar solar beams, staffs in the
air, dense dust, glossiness and oolour.

8. A wild beast, repeatedly uttering loud and horrible
shrieks, bespeake the destruction of a village; being blasted ®
by the sun and screaming from the right side,‘ he makes the
military forces to be slain.

* ‘The expression in the origival is, properly, “having half eat,” Le.
half the orb still appearing above the horizon.”

* ००००. तथाच अर्वः

अहोरा था खभ्धिः खा च खण्धया प्रकीर्तिता ।
दिनाडिका भवेत्सातु यावदा ष्योतिदुर्धनम्‌ 8
‘The word jyoti, instead of jyetis, is worth being remarked. Cl Wife

. in B. and R. 8kr. Dict. The feminine geader of sendhi, too, has net
beea met with elsewhere, so far as I am aware.

* Le, faclag the ०८०, सु्ाभिमुख. .

* Utpala explaine it diftereatly, vis., “ frous the south.”

Digitized py Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 138] =====
136
4. If the animal does so from the left, there will be a

battle. If he happens to be on the right side and unmo-~

lested,! an encounter of armice will ensue.. Should a great
many animals or the wind stand in mixed quarters, during
dawn or twilight, then there will be rain.

5. A twilight* during which wild beasts and birds, vexed,
raise cries from the east, bodes the ruin of the land; one re-
sounding with the screams of animals, blasted by the sun,
from the southern region, points to the capture of the town.

6. Ill-omened is the twilight, if a strong wind, raising

dust and clods, with great noise shakes dwellings, trees, and

gateways, and vehemently throws the birds down.

7. Auspicious is the twilight, if animals and birds, un-
afflicted, send forth soft notes, and if there is no wind, or
only a gentle breeze by whose rubbing the foliage of the
trees is being slightly moved.

8. Sleek staffs in the air, lightning, fish-like clouds, a
mock-sun, a halo, a rainbew, straight lines resembling frag-
mentary rainbows and distinct sunbeams, at the time of twi-
light, bring speedy rain.

9. The Sun's rays being broken off, unequal, dissipated,
unnatural, crooked, turned to the leftward, thin, short, crip-
pled, and dimmed, bring war and drought.

10. The Sun's beams being brilliant, clear, straight, long,
turned to the right, in a cloudless sky, tend to the weal of
mankind. `

11. The bright, distinct, unbroken, straight sunbeams that
extend from the horizon up to the midst or over the whole of
the heavens, are the so-called “unerring” beams, These
produce rain.

12. Greyish,* tawny, ruseet, variegated, madder-hued,
greenish-yellow and spotted rays, stretching all over the

* Comm. QTAfEeS मधुरस्वरे नाकामिसुदिच ।

© «Twilight” denotes here and in the sequel both dawn and evening
twilight.

* Comm. werent: Prrtrcwenaat: |

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 139] =====
187

heavens, are conducive to rain, but produce also, after a week,
come danger.

13, 14. Copper-red sunbeams cause the death of a general
yellow and rosy ones, his ill-fortune; greenish-yellow ones,
the ruin of cattle and crops; dark purple ones, the loss of
kine; madder-coloured rays occasion consternation, owing to
the sword and fires; tawny ones, a rain with wind; ashy-
coloured ones, drought; spotted and greyish rays! cause
alight rain.

15. If at the time of twilight dust, tinged like the blossom
of Pentapetes Phosnicea, or like collyrium powder, goes up to
the Sun, mankind will be afflicted by hundreds of diseases.

” White dust presages men’s prosperity and bliss.

16. A compound of solar rays, clouds and wind, in the shape
of a staff, is called an (airy) “staff.” If seen in the inter-
mediate regions, it is baleful to monarchs; if in the cardinal
points, it is so to Brahmans, Kshatriyas, eto.*

17. A staff appearing at the beginning, middle, or end of
the day,? causes danger from the sword and grief. If white,
it destroys the Brahmans; if red, the Kshatriyas, eto., and
that in the direction to which it is turned. ॥

18. A dark blue tree-like cloud, with milk-white top, in
the midst of the canopy, and screening the Sun, as well as
clouds with yellow streaks and big at the bottom, procures
much rain.

19. If a tree-like cloud arises behind a sovereign on march,
he will be killod; if it looks like a young tree, the prince
royal or minister will die.

20. A dawn showing the hue of blue lotus, beryl, nelum-

" ८००००. जुबखकच्यायाः सितृष्यनीलपीतब्ामिग्रवयीः।

* 7१० ?. द्विजादीनाम्‌ » एथथन्छ०  दिजातीगाम्‌।

° The word प्राद्मुध्यखण्धिषु ४ a striking example ef inaccuracy, as
‘the author must have meant HTQIWTal® or NTYTUVETETy.
“This must be inferred from the plural uftqy, which woald have been
‘wuaiy:, if only the beginning and middle of the day were meant. Utpala

००; खद्यमध्या्राखमयकाेष 0 ~

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 140] =====
188

bium filaments, free from wind, and brightened by the Sun’s
rays, produces rain the same day. *

21. Dawn in the rainy season being attended with ill-
shaped clouds, Fata Morgana, mist, dust and smoke, puts a
stop to the rain; in any other season, it occasions the raging
of the sword. : व

22. The natural colour of twilight during the different
seasons, to begin with the cold season, is red, yellow, blank,
variegated, nelumbium-hued and crimson, each of which is
favourable in the proper season. Any deviation from this
rule is portentous. ,

23. A cloud fragment in the shape of a man with a weapon,
and tending to the Sun, points to danger from the foe. When
a bright airy city (ic. Fata Morgans) is approached by the
Sun, a (beleaguered) town will be taken; when the same is
crossed by the Sun, the town will be destroyed.

24, The Sun being concealed by white and far-stretching
clouds on the right side’ bestows rain; #0, too, does the
Day-god, being covered by clouds resembling tufts of Andro-
pogon grass, and issuing from a quarter not blasted.’

25. A white cloudy bar through the Sun’s orb at the time
of his rising causes disaster to the king; one of bloody ap-
pearance occasions the raging of armies; one shining like
gobi makes armies prosper.

26. Two colossal mock-suns, one on either.side of the Sun,
bring plentiful rain; but if mock-suns surround the Sun in
four directions, there will not be one drop of rain.

.  %7%. Olouds at dawn or evening twilight, in the form of
banners, umbrellas, rocks, elephants, or horses, bode victory ;
blood-red ones, a battle.

28. Clouds suspended like heaps of amoke from straw fire,
and smooth in appearance, make the armies of monarchs

prosper.
29. Clouds at twilight hanging down, or tree-like, or

* From the south.
® About UYH aad WTe, of. ch. Lxxxvi. 19, and Ind. Sted. x. p. 202.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 141] =====
139

rough' in appearance and rosy, are auspicious; such as
resemble towns, bring good luck.

‘30. A twilight accompanied with the cries of vexed birds,
foxes, and wild beasts, with airy staffs, dust, cloudy bars, and
the like, or with daily recurring unnatural solar phenomena,
foreshows the ruin of land, king, and welfare.

81. Dawn produces its results immediately; evening twi-
light the same night, or after three days; halos, dust and
cloudy bars show their effects either instantly or a week after.
The same with solar beams (of peculiar cast), rainbows, light- |

" ning, mook-suns, clouds; and wind. Birds do so the eame day
or that day week ; wild beasts in a week.

82. Twilight sheds its gleam (and shows its effects) over
one yyana; lightning illumines by its flickering six yofanas;
the sound of thunder extends over five yyanas; no limit can
be assigned to the falling of meteors.

33. The circle termed a mock-sun shines three yojanas far;
a cloudy bar, five; a halo is visible five or six yojanas; the
rainbow shows its lustre for ten yojanas.

Onarren XXXI_.
The Glow at the Horizon.

1. The glow at the horizon, if yellow, presages peril to
the king; if fire-red, the ruin of the country; if rubicund
and observed with wind from the left, it oocasions the los of
the crops.

2. One that makes its appearance with great
and distinctly sets off shadow, as the Sun does, bodes great
danger to the king; if bloody-red, it betokens the raging of |
the sword.

8, 4. By a glow in the eastern quarter, knights and sove-

. Feigns are to suffer; by one in the south-east, artisans and
princes; by one in the south, Vaicyas and persons of cruel

° ०७० ७०० ८५५०, खरा । अतीव चालावरदता । =.“

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 142] =====
140

cccupations; by one in the south-west, envoys and widows
who have re-married ; by one in the west, CAdras and agricul-
tarists; by one in the north-west, thieves and horses; by one
in the north, Brahmans come to grief; #0 do heretics and
merchants by one in the north-east.

5. A serene sky, bright stars, and a wind blowing from
. [eft to right, combined with a gold-hued glow at the horizon,
is for the weal of people and king.

Pe
Signs of an Earthquake.

1. Some say that an earthquake is caused by some huge
animal living in the-midst of the waters ;' others, however,
that it arises when the elephants of the quarters, being tired
of the earth’s load, are taking breath.*

2. A wind falling down upon earth with noise, as if strack
by another wind, occasions it, say some ;* others, however,

Comm. TUTE STNG = - ,

weweitafe qyt efteararnr |
~ , ण्ठिता जलजसलाच संचोभाचालयण्ति ताम्‌ ॥
» Comm. HUTT Wa
अल्वारः पुचिवीं भागा धारयन्ति चतुदिभ्रम्‌ ।
कधमानः सुवुस्ातिवु्ख पुथुभ्वाः
चर्धमानो दिं पूर्वां सुवु्ो दकिणां दिशम्‌ ।
पश्िमामतिवु्स्तु खौम्याश्ान्ु yyw: |
निथोगाद्रह्मदो हते धारयन वसुन्धराम्‌ ॥
ते चखन्ति यदा आन्ताः ख वायुः असनो महान्‌ ।
विवाश्महीं चायते भावामावाय देहिनाम्‌ ॥
The names of the elephants differ whelly from those we meet with in
Amarakeshe |. 1, 3, 5; Hemec. 170. .
9 eg. Veslsbthe, | ee

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 143] =====
141

maintain that it is ordained by unseen powers;! other masters*.
again narrate the following.

४. In the days of yore the mountains being winged shook
Earth by flying up and down, on which in the assembly
of the gods she spoke bashfully to the Creator :

4. “O Lord! the name of firmness, which thou hast
bestowed upon me, is put to naught by the mountains stir-
ring. I am not able to bear that toil.”

5. As the Creator belield her face slightly bent, and her

_ eyes in tears, while with quivering lips she stammered forth |
her speech, he spoke: °

6, 7. “Remove, Indra, the grief of Earth; throw thy
thunderbolt, in order to lop off the mountains’ wings.” “It
shall be done,” quoth Indra. “Fear not,” said he unto
Earth. “ Henceforth Vayu, Agni, Indra and Varupa shall
shake thee, in the first, second, third and fourth part of day
and night, in order to make known the consequences of good
and evil.”

* Utpala says: WEEMS WATMATFAR; erroneously, so far as

* concerns this passage. He cites himself the following stanzas of .
Vpddba-Gargs’s तथाच quad:
प्रबाधर्मरता यच तच कम्पं शुभं भवेत्‌ः।
अनाना मेये निन्धं वियुन्ि सुरोमा ॥
विषपरीतख्धिता य जनाख्जायुमं तथा ।

विसुजन्ति प्रजानाशु दुःखद्ोकामिवुखवे॥
1५४ णन्मल्म ६५ सदृ चत ष्णः०००, ० सुतोत्तमाः. अग्मन, एकम
takes कारित to mean WA, which is purely fanciful.
e.g. Paricara.
* ००००५. परश्चर आह
तथ चतुषु चतुभाभेषु दिवागलमनिलानखेग्रवददवं कन्यक्रमं वि- ,
श्यात्‌ 8 एतत्खाष्टतरं मरमं आह .
छल्ा चतुधाहोराषं द्विधाहो "च द्विषा निशम्‌ ।
शेवताम्ययोयाचच चतुधा भगवं तथा ॥
पु दिग बायग्य आपेयो -सतु पञ्िमे।
शिकः पूर्व राधं पञ्चिमाधेच वाददः ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 144] =====
142

8. The asterisms Uttara-Phalgunt, Hasta, Citra, Sviti,
Punarvasa, Mygaciras and Agvint constitute the division
ruled by Vayu. The foretokens belonging to it show them-
eclves a week before the event, and are the following :

9. A wind that raises the dust of the earth into a most -
hasy sky, and bruises trees in his course, while the Sun shines
with faint rays. “

10. By an earthquake of Vayu’s, it is eaid that crops, rain,
woods and weeds get damaged; merchants are to suffer by
intumescence, heavy sighing, madness, fever, and cough.

11. Handsome persons, men of arms, physicians, women,
poets, singers, dealers, artisans, the Sarashtrians, Kuras,
Magadhas, DacArnss, and Mateyas have to suffer too.

12. The asterisms Pushys, Krttiké, Victkha, Bharan!,
Maghi, Pirva-Bhadrapadd and Pirva-Phalgunt make up
Agni’s division, to which pertain the following symptoms:

18. The firmament, covered with falling stars and meteors,
atands in a blaze, as it were, by the glow of the quarters; .
fire, seconded by wind, stirs abroad for a week.

14. By an earthquake ruled by Agni, the rain-clouds vanish, + ~

the water-reservoirs become empty, the potentates quarrel,
herpes, scab, fever, erisypelatous eruptions and jaundice!

pepvail.

‘15. Ardent and fierce characters, the Acmakas, Angas,
Bahlikas, Tanganas, Kalingas, Vangss, Dravidas (or Dra-
midss), and various tribes of Cabara-eavages are to suffer.

16, The mansions Abhijit, Cravans, Dhanishthi, Rohint,

अलार एवमेते सयुरहोराणविकसपणाः ।
निमित्तभूता लोकामासुल्कानिधातमूजखाः 8
हवं चतौ वेला इति चिम्‌ #

For what purpose a naterel day is divided into four parts, and the whole
ef the lanar mansions lato as many portions, will appear from stanza 27.
५ 0* ०८०५० 7). ९०००. पाष्डुरोन खद्रानथः, Probably the
came dicsnse a5 (UTE; Atharve-Veda 1, 93. In the text UTED is, of
course, a typographical errer for UTEY-

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 145] =====
143

Jyeshtha, Uttara-AshAdh& and Anuridb& form Indra’s divi-
sion ; the tokens of it are:

17. Clouds that, bulky as mountains in motion, similar in
colour to buffalo’s horn, swarms of bees or snakes, emit a
deep sound and lightning, and pour out rain.

18. An earthquake during Indra’s division destroys such
as are renowned by learning, family and lineage, sovereigns
and heedmen of corporations. Jt produces dysentery, in-
fluenza, mouth disease, and violent vomiting.

19. It afflicts the Kacis, Yugandharas, Pauravas, Kirdtas,
Kiras, Abhisires, Halas, Madras, Arbuds, Suvistu, and
Malava, but yields desirable rain. व

20. Revatt, Pirva-Ashidhé, André, Aclesha, Male, Uttara-
Bhadrapad& and Qatabhishsj constitute Varupe’s division.
Ite signs are:

21, Thick, soft muttering clouds, showing the dark lustre
of blue lotus, bees or collyrium mixture, illumined by light-
ning, and diffusing prickly drops.!

22, An earthquake at Varuna’s division hurts the denizens
of the seas and rivers, bestows very much rain, and strikes
the Gonardas, Cedis, Kukuras, Kiritas and Videhas; at the
same time, however, quarrels cease.

23. An earthquake produces its results six months after-
wards; a typhoon after two. According to some authorities,
the divisions before mentioned are applicable aleo to other
portents.* ध

[24-26. Meteors, Fata Morgans, dust, typhoons, earth-
quakes, glow at the horizon, storm, solar and lunar eclipses,

i Utapala r. UTRTET, bat clouds can scarcely be compared te seeds,
or the fine drops te shoots.

* Comm. AUTH A: .
frtrtrerrentterrr: स्िग्धगग्मीरभिःखणाः।
भेघस्तनितद्दाच पूर्यन्ठोर्यहथे तथा ॥
परिषषेद्रणाप् watt

मण्डिरेव wan: सुभायुमफवप्रदाः ४
‘The three stansas in brackets are taken from our authes’s Samiea-
Saahitt, .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 146] =====
144

unnstural phenomens of lunar mansions and other stars, rain
by a cloudless sky, unnatural rain, rain attended with wind,
snoke and sparks of flame without fire, a wild beast entering
a village, rainbows appearing at night, unnatural signs at
dawn and twilight, fragmentary halos, rivers flowing back-
ward, notes of musical instruments in the air; of these, and
other phenomena contrary to the common course of nature, the
effoots must be made known in reference to the same divisions. ]

27. An earthquake ruled by Indra annuls one of Vayu’s
department, and Vayu paralyzes one of Indra’s. In the
same way do the earthquakes arising in the period and de-
partment of Varuna and Agni neutralize each other.'

28, By an earthquake ocourring during the division of Agni
and the period of Vayu, or vice versa, renowned monarchs
will die or suffer calamity, and the subjects, too, will be vexed
by dread of famine, by pestilence, and drought.

- 29, By an earthquake happening during the division of
Varana and the peried of Indra, or oice versa, there will be
abundance of food, happiness, rain, and contentment among
the people; the cows will yield plentiful milk, and the kings:
will put an end to hostilities. .

80. As to those omens for which no term is fixed,® Vayu
produces his effects in four half-months, Agni in three, Indra
.in a week, and Varuna the same day.

81. Vayu shakes the earth to an extent of 200, Agni of
110, Varana of 180, and Indra of 160 yojanas.*

1 de. the inflacnce of an earthquake that is to occur when one of the
asterisms in the division or department of Indra happens to be the
esteriem of the day, is paralyzed in case the period of its occurrence
csincides with the peculiar period of the day allotted to Vayu, and vice

2. देान्डनपिटवपरायषु wre: wat drat ग कथिते
wertee erat res’ wafer तदा चतुमिः पचर्मसद्रयेन फलन्ति ।

» 0००० तथाच काञ्चपः
जायन्दि मष्छते भिववं योगनानां अतद्रयम्‌ ।

इच्चाधिकमवापेय रेषे दष्यधिकं प्तम्‌ ।
जताद्वीतिलैषुतं वादव मण्डले चेत्‌ ।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 147] =====
146

82. If there be another earthquake on the third, fourth,
or seventh day, or a fortnight, month, or three half-months.
after, it will be deadly to eminent potentates. ^

 

*^0ष्र^+ दण्ड इहा, -.
Foretokens from Hetoore,

1, Meteors are the dropping fruits of merit enjoyed in
heaven, in visible form: They are divided into five kinds:
ignescent balls, meteors, thunderbolts, lightning, and (shoot-
ing) stars!

3. A meteor (in restricted sense) produces its effects in a
fortnight; likewise an ignescent ball ; » thunderbolt in three
half-months; lightning in six days; a (shooting) star the same.

8. Three out of the five phenomens of meteors have fall
effects, vis., lightning, meteors, and thunderbolts; a shooting
star is said to produce the fourth part of the full effect, and
an ignescent ball the half.

* Comm. witfgfir: gercaret wfient wer लोकपाला चोकाणां
PAUP aa arene च्वजितासुत्सुजग्ठि तान्येवोख्काः। तथाच
wi: :

खास्त्राणि सश्छवन्येते सुभासुभनिवेदिनः।

लोकपाला महाद्मानो लोकानां ख्यखितानि तु ॥
आचार्ये खल्यसंहितायां तदेवोक्तम्‌

अख्राणि लोकपाला लोकाभावाय सष्छवन्छुलकाः ।

केषाधित्पुखषटतां तचोह्ना विच्युतिः ख्यात्‌ ॥
इति ॥

‘The explanation of these mythological phrases {5 ०04 ताहन्यः ठ -
im the most common acceptation of the term, is a “shooting” or “ fall-
ing star.” Now, the notions of star, ray and darted weapons sre gene--
- rally expressed by the same word.: One instance may suffice, vis., the
etymological identity of Sanskrit WeqA and Greck dorpoy. Hence an
ulkd may be called an astrem. ‘The notion of “shooting” er “ shot”
finds its expression in WATHs that of * falling,” in fireyfeq and पत्‌, -
no.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 148] =====
146
4 A thunderbolt comes, crackling, down upon men, ele-

phante, horses, wild beasts, rocks, houses, trees, or cattle, at .

the same time wheeling and rending the surface of the earth.

6, Lightning frightens on s sudden animals by its orack-
ling, moves flaming in wide zigsage, and falls down upon
living creatures and faggot piles. ,

6. An ignescent ball is small, with a short tail,! and con-
tinues visible over a space of forty cubits or more. It looks
like a burning coal, and measures two cubits.

7. A (shooting) star is (apparently) a cubit in extension,
and white, red, or of the colour of lotus filaments. It moves
in the heavens horizontally, downwards or upwards, as if
being drawn.

8. A meteor (in restricted sense) is large at the top, and
increases in size in falling, dragging all along behind iteelf a
very thin tail. Its length (the tail included) is three cubits
and s half. There are many sorte of it.

9. Such as resemble spectres, weapons, asses, camels, crooo-
diles, monkeys, boars, ploughs, wild beaste, great lizards,
snakes, and smoke, have evil consequences, as well-as such
as have two cresta. .

10. Such as appear like banners, fishes, elephants, moun-
taivs, lotuses, the Moon, horses, glowed silver, or are shaped
like the figures called Crivates,? thunderbolt, conch and
cross, bring times of plenty.*

1 What bere Is called “tail” (puocka), Is not to be confounded with
- the tall, or rather crest (sikhd, elf) of a comet. The former is simply
a result of optical lasion.

® Utpala ९. सीव about which he remarks that It is well known,
(prasiddhe). From other passages it appears that he takes airqw to
be synonymous with freq, Aigie Marmelos. Cf. Weber, Fragment
dor Bhagavatt, pp- 306, 319. The compoond wutferrewatarst-
qa, Le., is an error for °Gt@, I presume; whereas Weber proposes
fo reed *WIfiat. The compound is a Babuvrihi, and may be rendered,
whose Privrkshe-figure possesses the proper marks.”

* Comm. NUTS STW:

पतेत्वदा ।

जरेभतुरबश्चाप्मवुचेषुख
छवलन्यी चद्रवदुश्णा लद्नो रावखंयुता ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 149] =====
147

11. Meteors, dropping in great numbers from the midst of
the canopy, are pernicious to king and land. By whirling
high in the sky, a meteor presages commotion among man-
kind.

12. One coming in contact with the Sun or Moon, or issuing
from either at the time of an earthquake, causes a hostile
invasion, the king’s death, famine, drought, and unsafety.

18. A meteor destroys monarchs staying in town or those
on march, according to its passing the Sun or Moon to the
right. One dropping from the Sun in front of the traveller
"brings good.

14. A meteor, being white, ruins the Brahmans; being
red, the Kshatriyas; being yellow, the Vaigyas; and, being
black, the Gidras. The members of the four castes are also
hurt, severally, by meteors falling upon the head, shoulder,
side, and behind.

15. A meteor of coarse appearance brings woe to Brahmans,
by falling in a northerly direction; in an easterly direction,
to Kshatriyas, and so forth. If it appears sleek, not crooked,
entire, and is moving low, it tends to the prosperity of the

same. .
Farge waadt star wereait तरातरो ।
quedtirfirgangt Rage warren a
wyatt eq wr yan ger face weltfder .
ख्वजिताङ्गारसदृधी दौ welt खा प्रमाणतः ॥
पद्यतावाछतिशचैव इव्माचायतागता ।
तिर्यमूष्वमघो याति सोद्धमानेव तारका 8
खख्का मूर्धनि विख्या पतन्ती वर्धतेतु सा।
तशुपुष्छा भुमाचा तु वशूभेदसमावृता $
सआयुधपितसद्श्ी पम्युकोप्रखरारुतिः।
धख्रशटया छ पापाख्या विस्तीणा या तु मष्वमा §
च्वजपदेमहंसामा पर्वताश्चसमप्रमा ।
अीयुषधङ्गवदथा wires खा भिवप्दा ॥

It bs not necessary to point oat how closely our author has imitated
this passage.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 150] =====
148

16. One that is grey, rosy, blue, crimson, fire-red, dusky,
or ashy, and rough, visible st dawn or day-time, broken and
moving in « crooked way, bodes danger from hostile invasion.

17. In hurting asterisms or planets, a meteor is stated to
be disastrous to whatever belongs to their department.' By ~
dashing against the Sun or Moon at the time of rising or
setting, it is deadly for monarchs staying in town or on
march,

18. If Porva-Phalgunt, Punarvasu, Dhanishtha, and Mila
are scathed by 8 meteor, dameels are to suffer. Brahmans
and knights come to grief if Pushys, Svati, and Cravana are
attainted.

19. The (so-called) constant and kind asterisms being hurt, .
sovereigns are afflicted; the hareh and cruel mansions
being strack, thieves are to suffer; whereas artisans will
suffer, should the swift and neutral asterisms* be in the
game predicament.

20. By falling upon idols, meteors cause danger to king
and land; by coming down upon an image of Indra, they
cocasion distress to sovereigns; by falling upon dwellings,
they bring affliction to the owners.

21. By hurting the planet of a particular region,’ a meteor
causes suffering to the people in that quarter. If it comes
down on a threshing-floor, agriculturists are to suffer. If
it falls on a holy tree, the beings worshipped there are dis-
 treesed.

1 As enumerated in ch. xv. and xvi.

* Among the asteriems are called constant (WW): Rohini, Uttara-
Bhadrapadt, Uttare-Ashight, and Uttars-Phalgunt ; ४194 (सम्ब, मुदु)?
Mrgecires, Citrt, AnurtdbA, and Revati; harsh (Wy): Bharay!, Maght,
Phrva-Bhadrapedd, Porve-Ashight, and Pirva-Phalgest; cruel (@TWQ;
rem, YO): ०२८४, ८५०४१, Jyechtht, and Mila; owitt (Fyn, Wy):
Agvial, Tiahys, Hasta, and Abhijit; neutral (STUTCY, FEAT):
Kyttikt and Victkb&. Cf cb, xoviil, 6-11; aleo Weber, Jyotisha, p.
95; and Naxatra, ll. 385.

° The planets of the eight regions, east, south-east, etc., are the Sun,
‘Venus, Mars, Rabu, Saturn, the Moon, Mercury, and Jupiter.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 151] =====
149

22. A meteor, if coming down upon a city gate, bespeaks
the ruin of the city; if on s bolt, the destruction of the

ple; if on a shrine of Brahms, it crushes the Brahmans
if on « cow-house, the cow-keepers.

28. If at the moment of a meteor falling are heard such
eounds as roaring, claps, instrumental music, song and
clamours, they augur danger to the land and its ruler.

24. A staff-like meteor, whose train continues for a long
time visible in the sky, is dangerous for the king. So, too,
one that appears in the air as though it were drawn by a
thread, or one that resembles the banner of Indra.!

25. By going backward, a meteor ruins head merchants ;
by going in « horizontal direction, king’s wives; by tending
downward, kings; by moving upward, Brahmans.

26-28. A meteor shaped like a peacock’s tail brings
destruction to mankind; one creeping like s snake, is
disastrous to women; a circular one, is fatal to the town;
one in the form of an umbrella, to the court priest; one
resembling « tuft of bamboo, is noxious to the kingdom.

Mischievous also is one that bears « likences to beasts of .

prey, or boars, and shows a crown of sparks, or is shattered
to pieces, and attended with noise.

29. One that looks like « rainbow, destroys the empire ;
one that dissolves itself in the heavens, undoes the clouds
one moving against the wind, in a crooked way or backwards,
is not auspicious.

80. Danger threatens the king from the quarter from
which a meteor is approaching the town or host, but if the
monarch marches off to the quarter where a meteor comes
down blazing, he will ere long conquer his foes.
Cuarren XXXIV.
Signs of Halos.

1. Halos onsist of solar or lunar beams that, reflected
by the wind, take a circular shape and show themselves in
a slightly clouded sky in various colours and forms,

1 About the banner of Indra, see ch. xliii,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 152] =====
150

"2. They are crimson, deep ‘blue, pale yellow, dove-coloured,
darkish, speckled grey, greenish yellow or white, according
to their being produced by Indra, Yama, Varuya, Niryti,
Vayu, Civa, Brahma, or Agni.

3. Kubera is the author of one having the hue of « pea-
cock’s neck ; others produde halos of mixed colours. Viayu’s
work also is a halo that ever and anon is fading away,
having trifling results.’

4 A halo shining like the blue jay, peacock, silver, oil,
milk, or water, being glossy and entirely round, bestows
welfare and plenty, if appearing in its proper season.*

5. Mischievous is one that extends its course through the
whole firmament, shining, variegated or blood-red, rough,
broken, having the shape of a cart, bew, or triangle.

6. On the appearance of a halo tinged like the peacock’s
- neck, follows much rain; of a varicoloured one, the death of
the king; of a dark purple one, unsafety ; of one coloured as
the rainbow or the red Agoke, war.

7. When there is « glossy, thick halo, which shows the
natural colour of the season, and is overcast with stratified
’ @louds, it brings rain on the eame day. So, too, does « yellow
one, when the Sun is shining fiercely.

8. A huge, hazy halo scen st dawn, noon, or twilight,

* Comm. TET BTN:

सितपीतैक्रनीलामरह्कापोतवथवः।
जवखवरिव्याच विदचेयाखे युभावहाः ॥
रद्रथाम्याप्ये ऋंत्ययादयाः सौम्यवटिवाः।
wargde wits eee: सो "पनिष्टदः ॥
® Much mere porspicuces is the following passage from Kicyapa:
जिभरिरे चाव wat fafeatine: |
WR Coreg: wrqg Rese: 8
WT Te: TE: We ET
हेमन्ते जलदाः सका नुदः सुतः 8

Cartons are HTYS and WC, ineteed of the locative, instrumental,

@F even accusative case.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 153] =====
161

while blasted birds and wild deer emit their cries, causes un-
safety, and, if hurt by lightning, meteors and the like, it
slays the king by the sword,

9. Whenever the Sun or Moon daily, during day and night,
looks red, death awaits the sovereign ; likewise, when both
are repeatedly surrounded by a halo at the time of rising,
setting, or noon.!

10. A halo consisting of two circles is threatening to the
commander of the army, though the raging of arms caused
by it is not eo very violent. Three circles foreshow the .
raging of the sword ; four of them, peril for the prince royal;
five of them, the siege of the town.

11. A planet, the moon and s star being inclosed (within
a halo, at the same time), there will be rain in three days, or
war ina month. A halo surrounding the lord of the horo-
scope, the lord of nativity, or the birth-star® of the king, is
an evil omen for him.

* Comm. AWTS Wa: .
दिवा सूरय परिवैवो राणौ चद्र TET AAT
एकस्धिंखिदहोराचे तदा न्ति पार्थिवः 8
एतेन विधिणा नित्यं सप्ताहं परिविष्टने।
खर्वभूतविनाथः स्थात्‌ तस्धिचुत्पातदर्थने ॥

* Utpela: ung भवति । चन्दर परिवेषमध्ययते यषहनववे चदा
were Bee fereta वु्ठिभवति। तथाच गमेः

fa geared cred चद्रमा पहः।
US THATS ATATAT जायते भयम्‌ ॥

* ‘The lord of the horoscope Is the planet presiding ever the hore-
scope; the signs Aries, Taurus, etc., are lorded ever by Mars, Venus,
Mercury, the Moon, the Sun, Mercury, Veaus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Satara and Jupiter. See Brh. Jitaka, 1. 6;"Laghu-Jataka, i. 8 (Ind. ˆ
Btadles, li. p. 278). ‘The lord of nativity Is the sign the Moon ie stand-
ing in at the time of one’s birth. Aboat the birth-star, see ch. iv. 28,

` ५०८००४९. Utpela: revfndy aareaa: | warfirdy crerfieg:
and in his comment on YogayftrA, iv. 43 यच राद्नौ ५“ Inner maasion,

here) fiat warafar wrererererdey व

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 154] =====
. 152
` 19. Saturn, if shut up within the halo, rains the lessor

grain sorts,’ occasions rain seconded by wind, and destroys -

trees, plants, eto., along with agrioulturiste.

18. If Mars happens to stand within the halo, young
princes, military commanders and soldiers are defeated,
whertas fire and sword are threatening. Should Jupiter be
encircled, then court priests, ministers and kings are to suffer.

14. A prosperous condition of ministers, trees and writers,
ae well as good rain, are the effects of Mercury being en-
circled. Distress comes to chiefs on march and sovereigns,
-and dearth ensues, should Venus be inclosed.

15. Danger owing to famine, fire, mortality, the ruler and
the sword, arises from a comet standing within the circle. If
Rahu is shut in, there will be danger for the king, danger
for unborn children, and sickness.

16. If two planets stand within a solar or lunar halo, one
may with certainty expect battles, and if three planets are
in the same predicament, danger from famine and drought is
announced.

17. The sovereign, along’ with his ministers and court
priest, falls « prey to death, if four planets are invested.
Know that the world cometh to an end, as it were, if five or

planets stand within the circle.

18, The appearance of a halo, apart from « planet or any
asterism (being inclosed), may cause the king’s death, unless
& comet appear at the eame time.’

1 Comm. YRUTUTEY frengretfer

® Im the latter case the effects of the comet only should be considered.
Comm. HUTS STW:

ufcteraarcalt ot et orftorrat |
gee waft fet dread मुदाख्णम्‌ 8

क

: परिविषटस्तु राच्चासतु मरं भवेत्‌ ॥
मष्छलान्तरिताः पञ्च अमतः खङ्कयावहाः।
que ताराग्हश्ैव गचषादयामथापिवा ॥
परिषेषो चदा दृश्षखदा गरपतेर्वधः।
अदि कतूदथो न खादग्यचा तत्फलं वरेत्‌ &

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 155] =====
` ~ 63

“19, 20. A halo being ‘seen on the first, second, ete.; of ‘the

~ month, has baneful results for Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaigyas,
Gfidras, in succession. On the fifth, it is fatal to the guilds;
con the sixth, to the town; on the seventh; to the treasury ;
“onthe eighth, to the prince royal ; on the three days follow-
“ing, -it is noxious to the ruler; on the twelfth, it oocasions
the siege of the town; on the thirteenth, mutiny among the

21. A halo, showing ‘itself on the fourteenth, makes the
queen suffer ; on the fifteenth, it afflicts the king himeelf.
22. A straight line within a helo is to be considered 'as
concerning kings staying in town; one without ‘the vircle, as
' pertaining to kings on march; one through ’the ‘midst of the
halo, as belonging to allies coming to the resoue. "
28. Those kings whose special line looks crimson, dingy
and coarse, get: worsted, but those whoee own’ line is white,
-~ bright and sleek; will conquer.

Omarren XXXV.
Signe of Rainbows.

1, The rainbow is formed by varicoloured solar rays that,
pressed by the wind, appear in the shape of a bow in « cloudy
sky ” ध

2. Some Masters! say that the rainbow arises out of the
exhalations of the serpents of Ananta’s family.—A rainbow, .
if seen by kings on march in front, brings defeat.

3. A thick, varicoloured rainbow, unbroken, reaching to
the ground, brilliant, sleek, double, observed behind (the
person marching), is auspicious, and bestows rain. .

4. One that arises in any intermediate region is pernicious
to such classes as preside over that particular quarter; one

1 Amongst others, Kacyapa. .
* The classes presiding ever the eight quarters are caumerated in
ch. Ixxxvi, 34, ¢.0. ° .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 156] =====
4 M298

‘being seen in a cloudless sky produces pestilence. Pink,
. yellow, and dark blue rainbows engender evils from-war, fire,
: famine.

:- 6 Arainbow, appearing in water, produces drought; on
the earth, the loss of the crops; on « tree, sickness; on an
ant-hill, danger from the sword. If seen at night, it in-
dicates the death of s minister.

6. A rainbow, if shining in the eastern quarter, out of the

- rainy season, brings rain, but within the season it prevents
' vain. If seen in the west, a rainbow announces rain at any
» time. ,

7. A nocturnal rainbew in the east brings distress to the

king; such a one being observed in the south, west, or.

’ north, will crush a chief commander, a grandee, or minister

- (severally). ध

. 8, Anight rainbow of white colour brings woe to Brahmans ;
one of red colour to Kshatriyas, and so forth. It will, besides,
ere long, destroy the principal monarch in the quarter where
it happens to be observed. ` '

(Te be contioned.)

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 157] =====
‘ 1

155 > vi, 36 " `

Cuarren XXXVI.
The Phenomenon termed an Aerial City (Fata Morgana).

1. An serial city in the north is detrimental to the court
Priest ; one in the east, is 60 to the sovereign; one in the

` eouth, to the commander of the troops; one in the west, to .

the prince royal. A white one is pernicious to Brahmans,
8 crimson one to Kehatriyas, yellow one to Vaigyas, and a
dusky one to Cidras.

2. The same phenomenon, if visible to the northward,
brings victory to such kings as stay in their residences; if it
is seen in any intermediate quarter, it tends to the destrac-
tion of individuals of the mixed classes. When -an aerial
city, along with triumphal arches, appears in a tranquil
quarter, it forebodes triumph to the king. .

8. On arising, in all quarters and at all times, the pheno-
menon brings danger to king and people. When it resembles
anoke, fire, or a rainbow, it will kill thieves and foresters.

4, An aerial city of faded colour brings wind and thunder;
a glowing one causes the death of the mongrch ; one seen
on the left sugurs danger from the enemy, but one on the
right brings victory. ^

5. When a vari-coloured aerial city makes its appearance
with streamers, standards, and gateways, then the earth is
soon to swallow abundantly, on the battle-field, the blood of
elephants, horses, and men.

"र

 

Onarren XXXVII.

Mock Suns,
1, A mock sun, if sleek and showing the hue appropriate _
to the sun in the season in which it sppears, is held auspicious;

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 158] =====
156

it brings peace and prosperity by being very bright, and
beryl-coloured or white.
. A yellow one causes sickness, and one red, like an
Apgoka-blossom, announces the raging of the sword. A row
of mock suns betokens danger from robbers, and is mortal to
the
8. A mock sun, when standing north of the sun, gives
rain ; when south, wind; when on both sides, there is peril
of inundation ; when it is seen above, it is pernicious to the
sovereign ; when beneath, to the people.

Onarren XXXVIII.*
Fase.

1. They say that the death of the king is sugured by a
haze appearing like s heap of thick darkness, when all
quarters are eo shrouded that hills, towns, and trees, are
not discernible.

2. In the same quarter where a mass of vapour ‘first arises
or vanishes, danger is undoubtedly approaching in s week.

3. By « white mass of hazy clouds, the ministers and
country people are to suffer; before long the sword will rage
and success be much impeded.

' 4, If at sunrise a hase arises, covering as it were the
whole canopy for one or two days, it presages awful danger.

5. Dimnees uninterruptedly thickening during one night,
destroys the principal monarch, but is conducive to the safety
of eage rulers.

6. In the kingdom where a thick mass of gloom is spread-
ing for a couple of nights, one may foretell an invasion from
hostile forces. `

7. & dimnees descending and staying for three or four

* In the compound dasynbheyftenkenrpehantrl a word like de, kare
fe omitted by the poet.

- 9 This chapter is wanting In the MSS. of the commentary, and
betrays a style diferent from our author's.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 159] =====
187

nights, blights food and fluids; when it lasts for five nights,
there is to be s mutiny amongst the royal troops.

8. When dimness arises, apart from the appearance of
comets and the like, it produces horrible danger. Its effects
are, as the masters of the science declare, unimpaired in any
season but autumn.

Cuarren XXXIX.

_ Typhoons.

1. When a wind clashing with another wind is struck
down from the air to the earth, then s typhoon is produced.
It is ill-boding if accompanied by the cries of vexed birds.

2. At sunrise it will injure judges, kings, wealthy men,
soldiers, wives, merchants, and courtesans; in the morning
(from six to nine o’clock) it is mischievous to goats and -
sheep, Cadras and burgesses.

3. At the time (from nine o’olock) till noon it will affect
royal attendants and Brahmans; in the third part of the day
(from noon till three o'clock), it will be bad for Vaicyas and
rain-clouds, and in the fourth part for thieves.

4. Just after sunset it destroys the outcasts; in the first
watch of night it ruins the grains; in the second watch it
vexes the hosts of imps.

5. It will oppress horses and elephants in the third watch,
and princes on the march in the fourth. It destroys the
region to which it is tending, with a terrific, hollow noise.

Onarren XL.
Prognostic for the Growth, of Crops.
1. Here are described which constellations on the Sun’s
entering Scorpio and Taurus are favourable, or the reverse,
‘to the growth of autumnal and summer corn, according to

the statements of BAdardyana.
2. The summer corn thrives, if, on the Sun's “entering
Scorpio, the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth house’are occu

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 160] =====
५

168

pied by benign planets,‘ or if he is looked at by the benign
planets when in their power.’

3. If the San stands in Scorpio, Jupiter in Aquarius, and
the Moon in Leo, or Jupiter in Leo and the Moon in
Aquarius, the summer corn will prosper.

4. If Venus or Mercury, or both, are stationed in the
second house from the Sun, or in the twelfth, the corn
will thrive, and exceedingly so should the constellation be
favoured by the aspect of Jupiter.’

5. If the Sun, being in Scorpio, stands between Mercury
and Venus, while Jupiter and the Moon are in the seventh
house from the San, the harvest will be most excellent.
‘When the Sun stands in the first part of Scorpio, and Jupiter
in the second, one must expect a half crop.

6. By Venus, the Moon and Mercury occupying the
eleventh, fourth, and second house, the Sun being in Scorpio,
the grains will prosper uncommonly, and so too will the cows
should Jupiter at the same conjuncture occupy the tenth house,

7. Jupiter in Aquarius, the Moon in Taurus, the Sun in
the beginning of Scorpio, Mars and Soturn in Capricorn,
form a constellation. that promises a rich harvest, but after-
wards dangor from hostile invasions.
~ 8 The Sun, by standing in Scorpio, between two evil
planets, makes the corn perish; a malign planet in the
eeventh house ruins it while sprouting.

9. An evil planet occupying the second house, if not

4 4.¢., Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus,
* ‘The parallel passage in Badarfyaps has:
reer खौन्ेर्वखवतिर्निरीचिति बुद्धिम्‌ ।
अीष्मजधाग्बस्त निर्दिेगष्यहतीम्‌ ॥
® Badartyana:
सृ्धे दितोधे मुर वा तच युगपदेव तयोः।
सिम्डमधोरयेषं मिषयभिुददृपातीव
* Badarhyapa:

शूराग्तःखः सूर्यो बुधिकसंखो विनाशयति सख्छम्‌ ।
ष ओआत॑जातं पापः खप्तमलंको "पि नाद्रयति ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 161] =====
159.

looked at by good planets, spoils the first growth, but isde-
cidedly favourable to the corn sown afterwards.

10. Two malign planets, if stationed in the seventh, tenth,
fourth, or first house from the Sun, in‘ Scorpio, make the
crops miscarry, but not everywhere, so that the planetary
aspects be not adverse.!

11. When two evil planets are standing in the seventh
and sixth houses from the Sun in Scorpio, then one may
expect a good harvest and a lowering of prices.

12. In like manner the learned astrologer must determine
whether the Sun on entering Taurus is to be pernicious or
favourable to the grains that shoot out in autumn,

13. If the Sun, when moving in Aries, Taurus, or Gemini,
is in conjunction with benign planets, or in their aspect, the
result is that the summer corn gets cheap* and is consumed
in peace.

14. The Sun has the same effect upon the autumnal corn,
if he stands in Sagittarius, Capricorn, or Aquarius at the
period of collecting. The reverse will take place if he is in
the aspect of, or in conjunction with, malign planets. ^

Cuarren XLI.
Classification of Natural Products.

1. To the domain of the sundry asterisms of the ecliptio,
the Seers have assigned several natural products, for the
prognostication of good or ill. I shall enumerate them
according to traditional and authoritative lore.

2.‘To Aries are said to belong: cloth, sheep’s wool, goat’s

1 Badarfyaga

qiranada: mit a: Georg wrfrat |
सौम्यय्रहसम्दृष्टौ ग तथा सर्वच निर्दि ।

* Not Tau, as the printed text has it, but Gaye is the true reading ;
ef, ch. xii. 12, The same word occars in a passage from some Saayti
quoted by Nilakanths in Mab&bbarata, xili. 23, 21 (Bombey ed.):

समर्धं घा्बमादाय महां यः प्रयच्छति। ~

ख वि वार्भुषिको नाम हइन्यकयवहिष्कुतः॥ =

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 162] =====
160

hair, lentils, wheat, resin, barley, weeds growing on land,
and gold.

8. To Taurus are referred, cloth, flowers, wheat, rice, barley,
buffaloes, and bullocks ; to Gemini, corn, whatever grows up
in autumn, creepers, esculent bulbs of water-lilies, and cotton.

4. To Cancer belong, paspalum, plantains, ddib-grass,
fruits, roots, leaves, and cocoa-nuts ; to Leo, grain in husks,
essences, skins of lions, etc., and sugar.

_ 6. To Virgo pertain, flax, awnlees barley,' dolichos, wheat,
kidney-beans and grain in pods;* to Libra, peas, wheat,
white mustard seed and barley.

6. Under Scorpio are brought, sugar-cane, whatever grows
through being watered, iron, goats and sheep; under Sagit-
tarius, horses, salt, cloth, missiles, seeamum, grain, and roots.

7. To Capricorn belong, trees, shrubs, whatever grows
through being watered, sugar-cane, gold and black iron; to
Aquarius, aquatic products, fruits, flowers, jewels, and
brilliant things.

8. Under Pisces are, such jewels as come from testaceous

animals,? aquatio products, diamonds, various oils, and what- ~~

ever comes from fishes.

9. By standing in the fourth, tenth, second, eleventh,
seventh, ninth, or fifth house, from the particular asterism
(to which any product belongs), Jupiter promotes the in-
crease of the products ; 80 does Meroury by standing in the
second, eleventh, tenth, fifth, or eighth house.

10. The planet Venus causes loss in the sixth or seventh
house, but increase in the rest. The malign planets are
favourable, if stationed in the Houses of Increase, but in-
flict loes if standing in other places.

"The meaning is doubtful; the Comm. only says that kelfye is a
sesyem ; at any rate it must be something different from kuletthe.

* Abest nishpfvs the Comm. remarks: WYRTAM UIfH FraTTR
frrerrare rea: 1 uf केचित्‌ । धिम्विघाग्धमिति किचित्‌ ॥

® e.g. from the pearl oyster.

* Le. the third, sixth, tenth and eleventh.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 163] =====
` न

11. If the evil planets in their power stand at evil dis-
tances from any asterism, the articles assigned to such an
asterism will become dear and scarce.

12, The benign planets in their power, by occupying a
good place with respect to any asterism, have the affect of
making the products belonging to such an asterism cheap
and abundant.!

18. A sign in the aspect of good planets in their power
produces no evil, even if the houses occupied are unfavourable.
The reverse applies to the aspect of malign planets.

Cuarrer XLII.

Prognostics for the Rising or Lowering of Prices.

1, 2. A change in the prices may be foretold on observing
uncommon rainfall, meteors, an airy staff, halo, eclipee, mock
sun or moon, and such like phenomena at new or full moon,
and at the Sun’s entrance into a new sign, every month. As
to uncommon phenomena on any other day of the month,
those have a tendency to make monarchs suffer from frays.

8. (If any of the aforesaid phenomena is seen) when the
Sun has reached Aries, one should: purchase summer’ corn;
and when the sun stands in Taurus, buy wild roots and fruits.
Then one shall gain (in selling those articles) in the fourth
month following. `

4. If one makes a store of all sorts of flavours and grain
during the Sun’s stay in Gemini, he shall in selling them in
the sixth month after have an enormous gain.

6. By laying up honey, perfumes, oil, ghee, and syrup, at
the time of the Sun’s stay in Cancer, one will get twice the
prime cost in the second month; but ‘by selling before or after
that period, one will sustain loss.

6. When the Sun is in Leo, one should buy gold, jewels,
skins, bark, weapons, pearls, and silver. If one sells them
in the fifth month, there will be profit, but otherwise loss.

. " स्ामर्घ्यम्‌ 1०५५००० ०८ खामर्ध्म्‌ । £ ५. -., 28,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 164] =====
162

7. The buyer of chowries, donkeys, camels, and horses,
when the Sun has reached Virgo, shall gain double if he श्ना
* im the sixth month afterwards.

_ 8. When the Sun is in Libra, let one purchase woven
articles, jewels, woollen cloths, glass, yellow flowers, and
corn; theese will, in six months, fetch double their price.

9. Fruita, bulbs, roots, and various gems, taken in when
the Sun stands in Scorpio, and laid up for two years, yield
a profit equal to double the prime cost.

10. Let one buy saffron, conch shells, coral, glass, and
. pearls, when the Sun is in Sagittarius; six months after
those articles will fetch double prices.

11. He who is anxious to gain must purchase iron wares
and corn when the Sun ocoupies Capricorn and Aquarius,
and sell a month after; he then gets double their prime cost.

12. By storing roots, fruits, bulbs, vessels, and jewels,
when the Sun has reached Pisces, for half a year, one shall
obtain a handsome profit.

18. These profits in reference to each sign of the ecliptic
are only promised in case the Sun or Moon is in conjunction
with a friendly planet, and in the aspect of such a one as is
befriended for the time being.

14. The Moon, by being in conjunction with the San, or,
when fall, in conjunction with, or looked at, by benign
planets, instantly causes a rising of prices. Both she and
the Sun, however, spoil the prices, if both are in conjunction
with, or in aspect of, evil planets. In this way one has to
tell the good or evil effects, after ascertaining which sub-
stances are assigned to each house.

©^ लड ` साना,
Festivity of Raising Indra’s Banner.

1. The immortals said unto the Creator: “O Lord! we
are unable to resist in battle the children of darkness. Hence
‘we approach Thee, the resource of those who are in n

2. The Lord said to the gods: “In the Milk-ses is Kegava ;

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 165] =====
` 16

He will give you the ensign, at the sight of which the
demons shall not withstand you in the struggle.”

3, 4. On obtaining this boon, the gods with Indra went to
the Milk-sea, and praised Him who is marked by the Crivates,
whose breast is beaming with the rays of the Kaustubha
gem, Him the Lord of Qri, the incomprehensible and in-.
comparable one, the life essence of all living beings, Viahyu,
the highest soul, who is without beginning, and to whom no _
limit is known.

5. Then, satisfied by their praises, the divine Narayaps
gave them the ensign that shall prove for the faces of the
brides of the demons such as the Moon is for the day blowing
lotus, but for the countenances of the goddesses, such as the ,
San is for the same flowers.

6. Indra gladdened at receiving the ensign produced from
Vishpu’s lustre, which was carried on an eight-wheeled
fulgent chariot, resplendent with gems, as if it were the Sun
beaming forth in autumn.'

7. By raising that standard, adorned with many tinkling
objects, garlands, umbrellas, bells and trinkets, the king of:
the gods annibilatod in battle the host of the enemy.

8. The king of the gods granted the bambu flagstaff to Vasu
the sky-traveller, lord of Cedi, and that monarch treated the
gift with due respect.*

9, 10. Satisfied by that festive demonstration, the ruler of
heaven declared: ‘Those kings who will act in the same
manner shall be rich like Vasu, and see their behests obeyed
on earth. Their people will be contented, free from peril
and sickness, and have abundance of food. The ensign is

‘The general import of the myth appears to be, that the Sun, the
source of light (Vishpa) bestows oa heaves (Iadra) his own kets (Le.
easiga and first gleam of day), before which the spirits of darkness
must needs vanish. ‘The festival described in this chapter, like many
"other feasts at certain seasons, may be called a natural myth readered
plastic, dramatized. ‘The elght-wheeled chariot is the day divided into
eight yémas. .

® The same myth Is told in MahAbbirate i. 63, 15, ergy. (Bombay ed.).

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 166] =====
164

_ aleo to bode through foretokens what good or evil conse-
quences await mankind.”

11. Now am I going to propound, sccording to authori-
tative traditional lore, how in the days of yore monarchs
“ wishing for victory and increase of power have honoured
that standard by Indra’s command.

12. The precept is as follows: —The astrologer and master-
carpenter go to the wood at a lucky Karana,! day, asterism, and
at an auspicious hour, when all augurs well for the journey.

18, 14. Trees not fit as material for Indra’s standard are
such as grow in public gardens, temple yards, cemeteries,
ant-hills, roads, and hallowed spots; or such as are stunted,
sear at the top, spinous trees, those entwined by creepers and
parasitic plants, or covered with numerous birds’ nests and
holes, or hart by fire and wind, and such as bear feminine

appellations. ¥

16, 16. The fittest trees are Terminalia Arjuna, Vatica
robusta, Terminalia tomentosa, Grislea tomentosa,® and
glomerated fig-tree. In taking one out of these five or some

other estimated timber tree growing on white or-black soil, “~~

the Brahman divine has first in due form to pay his respects
to the tree, and after approaching it on s lonely epot at night
fime, touch it and recite the following spell:

17. “Hail to all beings living in this tree! Reverence
to yel May you change your abode after taking this
oblation :

18. “Hail to thee, O pre-eminent tree! The king chooses
thee for the standard of the king of the gods: accept thou
this homage!” .

19. On the next morning the carpenter has to hew the
tree, with his face turned towards tho north or east. A
hollow sound of the felling axe is not auspicious, but a soft
and fall tone favourable.

+ ९ ०.9, &.

® ‘Ther. dhave of the printed text is as doubtfal as its readering 5
the Comm. bas vedhe, certainly the word from which bédhaks, explained
as réjeopkeha and girimdle (sce Si0htl. and Reth, Dict. |. v. bédheke), is
derived. . .

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 167] =====
165

20. If the tree falls to the eastward or northward, un-
impaired, not crooked, and without getting entangléd in an-
other tree, it bodes victory to the sovereign; should the tree
come down under the contrary circumstances, it must be
left alone.

21. After chopping off four digits from the top, and eight
from the bottom, one must throw the trunk into water; and
then, after it has been taken out again, have it transported to
the town gate by means of a cart, or carried by men.

22. If one of the spokes gives way, there will be bickerings
in the army; if it is the periphery that breaks, you may be
sure that the army will be destroyed. Rupture of the axle
presages loss of wealth, and of the axle-pins bodes ruin to
the carpenter.

28, 24. On the eighth day of the bright half of Bh&drapad®
should the king, surrounded by citizens, with the astrologers,
ministers, chamberlains, and Brahmans foremost among them,

_ all in festive dress, order the standard of Indra to be carried
by citizens into the town, amidst the sounds of horns and
musical instraments, while the staff is covered with new
cloth, and enveloped in garlands, perfumes, and incense.

„ 25, 26. Gaudy streamers, triumphal arches, and festoons
of wild flowers adorn the town where the inhabitants are
over-merry; where the streets are cleaned and trimmed,
crowded with handsomely-attired courtesans; where the
shops are trimmed up, the squares crowded with mimics,
dancers, and singers; where many festive and solemn shouts
are heard.

27. White streamers foreshow triumph, but yellow ones
sickness ;. vari-coloured ones bring victory, whereas red ones
presage the raging of the sword,

28. If the staff in entering the town is subverted by
elephants or other animals, danger is impending. A sound
of boys.clapping hands or a fight between animals (on that
occasion) augurs war. ^

29. Thereon (when the beam has safely arrived in town) .
must the carpenter plane it, and then raise it on a machine
according to the rules. The king now orders & vigil to be.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 168] =====
166

kept with it, on the eleventh (of the bright half of Bha-
drapada).

30. The court priest, clad in white and wearing a white
turban, makes a sacrifice to the Fire with hymns to Indra
and Vishnu, whilst the astrologer has to observe the
symptoms.

31, A blazing fire, ardent, smooth, compact, having the
shape of auspicious things, brings blessings; one showing
different qualities is evil. This subject has been more amply
treated in the Yatra.!

32, A fire that at the final benediction blazes forth of
iteelf, and with soft lustre turns its flame to the right, renders
all earth subject to the monarch, she whose girdle is the
ocean and whose lovely necklace is the glittering stream of
the Ganges and Jamn4.

33. When the fire shows the hue of gold, Acoka blossom,
yellow Barleria, lotus, beryl stone or blue lotus, then shall

. darkness, expelled by the rays, find no room in the royal .
house.

34. Those (princes) to whom fire emits a noise like that of
a multitude of chariots, like the sea, clouds, elephants, or
battle-drums, shall in their march cause the regions to be
* dagkened and shaken by the troops of their infuriated
elephants,

35. Whenever fire assumes the shape of a banner, jar,
horse, elephant, or hill, earth (in all her extension, 80 as to
have) the mountains of sunrise and sunset for lipe, and the
Himilaya and Vindhys for breasts, comes under the sway of
(wach) kings (for whom the sacrificial fire shows those
symptoms).

36. If fire has the seent of the elephant’s frontal juice, of
cil, lotus, fried grains, ghee, or honey, earth is to be like a
moeaio formed by the rays issuing from the crown jewels of
prostrate potentates.

37. These good or evil omens which arise from the fire at
(the festival of) Indra’s banner, are likewise to be observed

 Yogayltrt, ch, vill.

वि

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 169] =====
167

av ine casting of horoscopes, at sacrifices, propitiating obla-
. tions to the planets, at the periods of marching and wedding.

38. When the priests have been honoured with sugar,
cakes, milk porridge, etc., and with guerdons, the ensign of
Indra should be raised on the twelfth, whether the asterism
of the date be Qravana or another.

39, 40. Manu has laid down the rule, that there are seven
or five smaller flagstaffs to be wrought by akilled artisans
and called “ Indra’s daughters.” The two named Nanda
and Upanandé measure three-quarters of the height (of the
great standard), Jay& and Vijaya, and two others, both
termed Vasundhar4, are taller by a sixteenth. Higher by
an eighth than all these is “‘ Indra’s mother,” in the middle.

41. The various trinkets with which the immortals once
joyfully decorated the divine banner, ought to be put on in |
due order.

42. The first ornament, being of quadrangular shape, and
of the hue of red Agoka blossom, was given by Vi¢vakarman.
Brahma and (iva gave a vari-coloured girdle!

43, The third ornament, octangular and dark red, was
granted by Indra. Yama bestowed the fourth gift, a dark,
yet lustrous, pillow.*

44. The fifth gift from Varupa, was a sexangular, madder-
hued, and resembling waving water; the sixth, from the
god of air, was an armlet made of peacock’s feathers, and
dark as a cloud.

45. Skanda contributed for the banner his own motley
arm ring,’ being the seventh gift. The eighth ornament, `
given by the god of Fire, bore likeness to a fire flame.

' The first ornament seems to signify the first streak of red at dawn ;
the girdle beloaging to Brahma, in his quality as Prajipati and sam-
wateare, and to Civa, in his quality as Time, is » symbol of the circle
of Time.

* The gift of Indra is, apparently, a symbol of the day divided into
elght watches; Yama’s is a symbol of rest, and at the same time some-
thing lustrous, because Yama is the lord of the dead and the genius of
svening twilight. .

* Skands, the “marching” god, and therefore called the Wargod, is `.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 170] =====
168

46. The Moon presented, ninthly, a collar hued like beryl-
stone.' The San in his quality of Maker (of the phenomenal
world) bestowed a tenth gift, an ornament resplendent and
similar to a chariot’s wheel

47, The Vigve Devas contributed the eleventh ornament,
called Udvanga,* and lotus coloured. The Seers gave the
a termed Nivanga, and showing the tinge of the blue

tus.

48. The planets Jupiter and Hesperus offered as their share
to the standard the thirteenth ornament, something projecting

* at the upper and lower ends, largest at the top, and coloured
like red lac.

49. These decorations to the banner are, each of them,
consecrated to the divine being by whom they were pro-
duced, which the wise will do well to observe.

50. The circumference of the first trinket is a third of the
extension of the banner. The dimensions of each of the
following must be lessened by an eighth

51. On the fourth day next, a skilled person must equip
Indra’s standard, and the king? devoutly recite the fol-
lowing prayers which Manu has handed down from tradition.

52, 53. “Even as thou, O source of vigour, hast been
honoured with manifold sublime ornaments by (iva, the
Sun, Yama, Indra, the Moon, Kubera, Agni, Varuna, the

_ hosts of great Seers, the goddesses of. the quarters, the
Nymphs, Hesperus, Jupiter, Skanda, and the host of Winds,
so mayest thou now, O God, graciously accept these beautiful

. ts”?

54. “Thou art the unborn, imperishable, eternal, un-
changeable One; thou the all-fertilizing Vishnu, the

the personification of the year in its course; hence his token is a ring,
a drele.

५ A symbol of the cluster of asterisms, of course. The colour vai
Gérya is, according to Utpals, “ deep yellow,” sflepitakénti.

* The Comm. gives no satisfactory explanation of the terms udvancs
and aivanca ; he only says, udvencendmébharepem and sivencam nine.
+ © That the king himeelf has to recite the prayers is net caly stated

- by the Comm., but is alse manifest from st. 56.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 171] =====
169

primitive soul; thou art Death, the all-destroying Fire;
adorable art thou, with a thousand heads and a hundred
moods!” . ^

55. “TI invoke the seven-tongued Seer, who will save us;
I invoke Indra, who will protect us, the ruler of the gods,
the mighty, well armed killer of Vytra. May our warriors
be victorious!”

66, The king should, without breaking his fast, recite
these auspicious verses when Indra’s standard is being
deoorated, raised, brought into town, cleaned, crowned with
garlands, and when it is being removed.

57, 58. The ensign of Indra must be adorned with an
umbrella, streamer, mirror, fruits,! crescents, variegated
garlands, stems of plantain and sugar-cane, with trinkets,
figures of snakes and lions, loopholes and images of the
guardian gods of the quarters. Then should it be raised,
fastened with unimpaired ropes and props made from strong
wood, together with the smaller standards styled “Indra’s `
daughters,” these also made of strong wood, and unbroken.

- The triumphal arch is secured at the bottom by tightly
fitting mechanisms and pins.

59. The unceasing shouts of the crowd, along with festive
cries, benedictions, and salutations; the Piercing sounds of
war-drums, tabors, horns, kettle-drums and other instruments
must accompany the raising of the standard, all inauspicious
sounds * being hushed, as Brahmans incessantly recite texts
prescribed in the Scriptures.

60. The sovereign should (if necessary) order the citizens
having fruits, curds, ghee, fried grains, wax, and flowers in
their hands, while bowing their heads and shouting praises,
to keep Indra’s standard with the point directed against the
residence of the foe as if threatening’death to him. ,

' The v. r. has hela, “plough.” ‘

* The compound asubharehitersidam here denotes “without inanspi-
lous sounds,” and not, as it gramuiatically does, “with sousds free
from evil omens.” Grammar has been sacrificed to the exigencies of
prosody ; cf. ch. xix. 17 (trans.). The correct form of the compound .
would be egubhacabdarahitam.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 172] =====
170

61. The raising is lucky, if it is proceeding neither too
hastily nor too slowly, steadily, without damage to the gar-
lands, trinkets, and other decorations. If otherwise, it is an
evil omen, which the court priest should assuage through
expiatory rites.

62. If carrion birds, owls, doves, crows, and herons perch
on the banner, it is asserted that great peril awaits the
sovereign ; and if a blue jay perches on it, the prince royal is
threatened. A hawk alighting on it forebodes danger to

+ eyesight.

63. The breaking or falling of the umbrella gives rise to
the king’s death; marks of honey clinging to the standard
presage robbery; a meteor (coming down on it) destroys the
monarch, and a thunderstroke the queen.

64. The fall of a pennant has for its effect the loss of the
queen; the coming down of a trinket produces drought.
The flagstaff snapping asunder in the middle, at the top or
the bottom, destroys the ministers, the king, or citizens
(successively). ,

65. Danger from fire is foreboded by smoke = obscuration ~*~
of mind by darkness; the ministers are undone when snake
images are breaking or drop. In consequence of portents

~(ecen) to the northward (of the banner), Brahmans are
afflicted ; by such as are ecen to the eastward, Kshatriyas,
and so forth. The death of courtesans is announced by one
of the smaller staffs, termed Indra’s daughters, breaking.

66. 11 & rope gets loose or snaps asunder, children will
suffer; if a prop does, the king’s mother comes to grief.
‘Whatever unseemly or decent should be acted by children
or histrions, will have results corresponding with it.

67. When the erected standard of Indra has been wor-
shipped during four days, the king must, for the weal of his
army, in company with his ministers, with all reverence
cause it to be removed.

68. A prince who respects this institution, first established
by Vasu, the sky-traveller, and always since observed by
other rulers, may feel certain that no danger from enemies

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 173] =====
171

Ouarrer XLIV.
Lustration Ceremony.

1, A lustration of horses, elephants, and troops ought to be
performed at the season when our Lord Vishnu, whose eye- \
lashes are the rain-clouds, and whose eyes are Sun and Moon, „८
awakes from his slumber.

2. The expiatory ceremony termed lustration is to take
place on the eighth, twelfth, or fifteenth of the bright half
of Karttika or Agvayuja.

3, 4. There must be constructed on an approved spot,
northeastward of the town, a triumphal arch of excellent
wood, sixteen cubits in height, and ten cubits in extent;
besides a lodge where the expiatory rites are to be performed,
made of branches of Shorea robusta, glomerated fig-tree or
Terminalia Arjuna, and thickly strewn with holy grass, its
door adorned with bambu fish figures, pennons, and quoits.

5. When the horses are brought into the lodge, they
should have attached to their necks, by means of an amulet
string, marking nuts, rice, costus, and white mustard seed,
for the sake of their thriving.

6. The priest performs in the lodge the expiatory cere-
mony for the horses, during a week, with prayers to the
Sun, Varuna, the Vigve-Devas, the Oreator, Indra, and
Vishpu.

7. The horses are to be treated with respect, not spoken
to in a harsh way, nor beaten, their fears being removed by
festive sounds, and the noise of horns, musical instruments,
and song. ,

8. On the eighth day is erected, south of the arch, a shed
with its front to the north, strewn with holy grass and tree
barks; the fire is placed on the sacrificial eminence! (pre-
pared) east of the shed.

* Utpala ०८९,  बेरीवचयमवाययव नोक । चद्याभिरन्यभाखाय-
waa i ware
यथै चतुःषटिकरा विवाहे बेदी दिवानां दिनरप्रभाशा ।
काया Mitel राजन्धवि्ावुषला कानाम्‌

Digitized by Google

LE

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 174] =====
172

9, 10, 11. Sandal, costus, madder, yellow orpiment, realgar,
fragrant Priyangu, orris root, Croton polyandrum, Oocculus
cordifolius,! Morunga,? Ourcuma longs, Tabernsmontana
coronaria, Premna spinoss, Clitoria ternatea,? Pirnakosha,*
Katambhara,® TrayamAnd, aloe, Nagapushpé, Mucuns pruri-
tus, Asparagus racemosa and Asclepias acida: these are the
sacrificial ingredients to be put in jars, whereas an oblation
is made in due form, consisting of various meats, especially
honey, milk, and barley cakes.

12. The fuel must be from the khayar, Butea frondosa,
glomerated fig-tree, Gmelina arborea or pipal. One should
make the sacrificial ladle of gold or silver, if one is anxious of
well-bein,

18. The king, in fall pomp, attended by the horseleech
and the astrologer, has to take his seat on a tiger-skin, near
the fire, with his face to the east.

* 14, The foretokens of the altar, the priest and the fire,

aware व
खकप्तहला ब्राह्मणानां वेदी यच्च प्रकीर्तिता । - णि
वकराशामतो बूना निर्दि मुनिभिः सदा ॥ ॥
अतो ग्बूनाधिका वेदो यजमानस्य मृद्युदा ॥

शै विवाहे वच्छामि वेदिमानं समाखतः।
् विसप्तहस्वविषख्तारा ब्राह्मणानां शुभावहा ॥
wfvarat warn Sarat wrafir |
VATS Y गूद्रायां भिख्धिनां प कीर्तिता ॥
बिह व्बकशराणाणु बेदी ate afta |
मुवो "अलाभे मलानां चातुव प्रकीर्तिता ।
WIEST at वेदो सर्वमङ्गदाथिका ॥ .
" Comm, explains कभ जोध gudécf.
* Uncertain ; Comm. says, anjenam srotinjanam: prasiddham, sobhin-
fone of.
® Utpala explains agnimanthé with tarkért, and suet with girikarpiké.
© Probably the same with pérpakeshthé, a kind of Cyperus gress.
* Bynenymous with mahé;ueté, according to Utpala. .
* Comm. says only: yloakem yeveprakire}. =

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 175] =====
178

such as mentioned both in the Yatra in the chapter on the
sacrifice to the planets, and in the chapter on Indra’s banner,
must on this occasion also be attended to.

15, 16. After consecrating and washing a horse marked
with lucky signs and a choice elephant, honouring them
with new white cloth, perfumes, garlands, and incense, one
should softly lead them, with caressing words, under the
triumphal arch amid the sounds of musical instruments,
horns and festive shouts filling the quarters far and wide.

17. If the horse led to the spot, there stands with his
right foot uplifted, the king will soon without difficulty
conquer his foes.

18. A restive animal bodes ill to the sovereign. The
other motions of elephants and horses have been expounded
in the Yatra, and ought here also to bo considered so far as
applicable.

19. The priest should give the courser a morsel, having
muttered a benediction over it. By smelling at it or eating,
the animal is said to bring victory ; in the contrary case, the
reverse is to happen.

20. The priest now plunges a branch of glomerated fig-
tree into the water in the jars, and touches with it horses,
soldiers, elephants, and the king himself, with prayers for
expiation and prosperity.

‘ 21. The expiatory ceremony for the weal of the realm
being done, the priest proceeds to utter imprecatory spells, at
the same time piercing with a atiletto the breast of a clay
figure representing the enemy.

22. The court priest then puts, praying, the bridle bit into
the horse’s mouth, whereupon the king mounts, and, the
lustration being finished, moves with his army in a north
easterly direction.

23. The monarch, illumined by the multitude of moving
gleams proceeding from his numerous crown jewels, shines
like the sun at the season when the clouds have disappeared,
whilst the wind is scented with the fragrance of the juice
trickling from the elephants that are merry from hearing the
sound of tabor and horn. :

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 176] =====
174

. 24. The bright chowries wafting delicious breezes around
the king resemble the rows of swans of the king of the
mountains (HimAlaya) flying to and fro. It is those breezes by
which the splendid wreaths and garments are slightly moved.

25. Equipped with diadem, earrings, and armlets studded
with various gems and diamonds, and perfused by the rays of
many jewels, the monarch shows the lustre of the rainbow.
. _ 26, Barrounded by horses that seem to fly upwards to the
sky, and by elephants that appear to rend the earth, the
Prince will march amid his men as if he were Indra amid
the victorious gods.

27. Or adorned with diamonds and pearls, wearing a white
garland, turban, and perfumed garments, mounted on an
elephant and covered by the umbrella, he bears comparison
to Hesperus, when shining forth above s dark cloud and
below the Moon, -

28. He who owns an army in which men, horses, and
elephants are over-merry, which is glittering from the beams
of polished weapons, shows no evil symptoms, and strikes

` terror into the ranks of the enemy, shall soon" conquer the
earth. ॥

 

Cuarren XLV.

. Sight of Wagtaite.

‘ 1, Tam going to tell the effects which, agreeably to the
statements of the sages, take place on the first appearance of
the bird commonly called wagtail. ,

2. A big sort of wagtail, with erected and black neck, is
named “lucky,” and brings luck. Another, black as far as
his neck and face, is called “complete,” and fulfils hopes.

8. A third species has a‘black dot on the neck and white
cheeks; his name is “empty,” and he makes empty. A
yellow one, called orpiment-yellow,} augurs evil by its
Sppearance. .

* Im this instance geplts is net well to be explained, but as another
Spelling for gopitta. ‘The words pitta and pits are certainly originally

* Identical. ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 177] =====
176

4, 6, 6. A wagtail brings happiness by being seen on
sweet odorous fruits, flowers, and trees; at water reservoirs,
hallowed spots, on the head of an elephant, horse, or snake
on palaces and temples, in public gardens, near mansions, `
cows, @ cow station, a company of fashionable people, a
sacrifice, feast, princes, Brahmans; on stables for elephants
or horses; on umbrellas, flags, chowries, and the like; near
gold; on white cloths, water-lilies, blue lotuses, places decor-
ated and patched up, vessels of curds, and corn ricks.

7. Sweet food will be obtained when the bird is standing
in mud; abundance of milk (may be expected), when he is
standing on cow dung. When he goes on the turf, one is to
get cloth, and when he stands on a cart the country is to

8. By being seen on the thatch of a house he intimates
loss of wealth ; by standing on a thong, imprisonment; by
being stationed on an unclean spot, sickness. By being
‘perched on the back of a goat or sheep, he will bring about
a speedy meeting between lovers.

9. A wagtail is ill-omened and threatens death and disease

when appearing on buffaloes, camels, donkeys, bones, ceme- -

teries, in house corners, on gravel, hills,' town walls, ashes, or
hairs.

10. The wagtail is disastrous when he is clapping his
wings, but auspicious when drinking water or standing by a
river. He bodes good at sunrise, but produces evil effects
when seen at sunset.

11. If a sovereign after the consummation of a lustration
of his army moves in the direction in which he sees a wagtail
go, his foe soon comes under his sway.

12. On the spot where a wagtail goes a-pairing, there is a
treasure; beneath the place where he vomits, is glass; and
where he voids his increments is charcoal. So they say;
wherefore, to remove your curiosity, you may dig the soil.

13, A dead, crippled,-wounded, or diseased, bird produces
effects corresponding with his bodily condition. When he is

* The Comm. has effe, “a turret, bastion,” instead ef edri.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 178] =====
176

alighting in one’s presence, he brings wealth; and when he
is flying up into the air, he yields a meeting with relations. -

14. The king, too, when he sees an auspicious wagtail on
an auspicious spot, should arrange on the ground a hospitable
offering, wholesome and acceptable, along with fragrant flowers
and incense. Then he shall prosper.

16. Even if it be an ill-omened wagtail the king desories,
he shall not come to grief, provided he be careful to honour
the Brahmans, his gurus, virtuous men, and the deities, and
take no flesh meat for a week.

16, The effects attending the first appearance of wagtails
are to take place within s year; in other cases, however, on
the very day at a later hour. (To foretell the .effects), one
must make due allowance for modifying circumstances, as
direction, place, countenance, horoscope, state of quiet or
molestation, and so forth.:

 

Cuarrzx XLVI.
Portentous Phenomena.

1. I am going to treat of the portents which Garga
expounded to Atri. A portent may be shortly defined as
anything contrary to nature.

2. From the accumulation of evil, owing to men’s sinful
conduct, comes calamity, which celestial, atmospherical, and
terrestrial portents foreshow.

8. The deities, displeased with men’s sinful conduct, pro- ©
duce theee portents, to paralyze which the ruler should order
an expiation in his kingdom.

4, Celestial portents are unnatural phonomena of planets
and stars, meteors, typhoons, storms, haloes. Atmospherical
ones are aerial cities (Fata morgana), rainbows, and such-like.

5, 6. Terrestrial portents are those which occur with movable
and immovable things. The latter may be checked by expia-
tions and allayed; an atmospherical portent may be some-
what mitigated, whereas a celestial one cannot be
Thus it is asserted by some. Yet a celestial portent aleo may

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 179] =====
177

be allayed through donations of much gold, food, cows, and
land, through (the ceremony of) milking a cow on a precinct
hallowed to Rudra, and through the Kotihoma. :

7. A celestial portent may affect the sovereign in eight -
different ways, vis., in its consequences to himself, his children,
his treasury, his horse and elephants, his residence, his wife,
his priest, or his people.

8. The falling into pieces without any assignable cause, the
moving, sweating, weeping, talking, and the like, of emblems
of Civa, of idols and shrines, tend to the destruction of ruler
and land.

9. The breaking or coming down of an axle, wheel, yoke,
flag on the cart at a religious procession, the being upeet,
sinking in or getting entangled of the cart, bring no good to
land and king.

10. A portent appearing at images of the seers, Yama, the
ancestors and Brahma, is disastrous to Brahmans; a portent
at the idols of Rudra and the guardians of the quarters, is so
to cattle.

11. A portent at images of the planets Jupiter, Venus,
Saturn, augurs ill to court priests; one at Vishnu’s idol, to
the people at large; one at Skanda’s and Vicikha’s, to
governors of provinces.

12, An unnatural phenomenon at the image of the Veda-
Vyasa, threatens the royal counsellors; and one at Viniyaka’s,
the commander of the army. A portent at Dhétar’s and
Vigvakarman’s statue is stated to be disastrous to the people.

13. Any unnatural symptom at the images of the boys,
girls, wives, and attendants of the gods, concerns the king’s
eons, daughters, wives, and retainers.

14. The eame applies to images of giants, imps, elves, and
makes. All of them produce their effects in eight months, `

15. On perceiving an abnormal phenomenon at an idol,
the court priest, purified by a three days’ fast and bathing,
should worship the idol with a bath, flowers, ointment, and
garments.

16. The priest has, in due manner, to wait upon the idol
with a dish of honey and milk, such as presented to a guest,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 180] =====
178

to which are added sweetmeats and oblations of fruits, eto.
Farther he should present a cooked oblation, according to the
rules, along with prayers addressed to the god.

17. Those kings who, at the appearance of unnatural
symptoms of idols, duly direct expiations to be performed,
Brahmans and gods to be honoured, and a festival with sing-
ing and dancing to be held for a week, shall not experience
the evil results, as they are checked by those formalities and
by sacrificial fees.

18, In any country where something not fiery blazes forth,
and where fire not lacking the necessary fuel will not flame,
you may be sure that ruler and subjects shall be distressed.

19. If water, flesh, or anything wet, blases, the king shall
be killed ; if a weapon does 90, there is to be a dreadful war ;
the going out of fires in camps, villages, or towns, brings danger.

Where palaces, houses, gateways, flags and the like
are burned by fire or lightning, there is surely a hostile
invasion to be expected.

21. Smoke issuing from something else but fire, as well as
hasiness and utter darkness by day, forebode great danger.
The disappearing of the stars in a cloudless night, and their
being visible by day, is mischievous.

« 22. A glare proceeding from towns, quadrupeds, birds, or
men, is said to be dangerous. The appearing of smoke, fire,
and sparks, on couches, clothes, and hair, causes death.

23. On seeing weapons! blaze, move, utter sounds, jump
out of the sheath, tremble, or show any other unnatural
symptoms, one may predict that dreadful war and tumult is
quickly approaching.

24. In such cases one has to offer white mustard seed and

"1 The Comm. has a remark touching the proper meaning of éyudha,
la reference to the word preharaye occurring in stanza 19. He says:
जप्रजिता चिषलवय आयुधानां चयो भेदा अमिदहिताः। प्रहरणानि
पाकिसुशानि य्छमुह्धानि वेति । तच प्रहरवानि शद्गादीनि। पाषि-
सुद्ठानि चक्वादीनि। यकामुक्नाग्बद्मशराख्रकोदष्डाथेति । वेयमायु-
अमिति खञ्न्रा खा सर्वग्यापिनी ॥ तिश्डष्य४ is the repated author of
a work on the art of palating; ef. ch. Ivill. 4..

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 181] =====
179

ghee to the God of Fire, with invocations to him; the fuel
needed ought to be from juice-prodacing trees (e.g. Calotropis
gigantea). Besides, gold must be bestowed on the Brahmans.
Buch is the expiation for portents of fire, eto.

25. When boughs of trees on a suddon snap asunder, you
may predict a warlike expedition. On the laughing of trees
follows ruin of the country; on their weeping follows pre-
valence of diseases. :

26. A tree produces discord in the realm by blossoming out
of season. -When a young tree is exocesively in bloom, `
children will die. When milk is flowing from a tree, all
kinds of substances will be lost, ^

"27. The oozing out of spirituous liquor produces the loss
of elephants and horses; that of blood, brings war; that of
honey, sickness. When oil is flowing out, there is danger of —
famine; when water issues, there is some great peril. .

28. The sprouting of withered trees, and the withering of
healthy ones, augurs loss of strength and food. When trees,
once fallen, raise themselves, danger is to arise by the decrees
of fate. ॥

29. When a tree held in especial esteem bears blossoms ~
and fruits out of season, it is concluded that death awaits the
sovereign ; smoke or glare from it denotes likewise the king’s
death.

80. By trees leaving their places or talking, the ruin of the
country is announced. ll portentous tokens of trees take
effect in ten months.

31. After putting an umbrella upon the tree, worshipping
it with garlands, perfumes, incense, and cloth, and pro-
pitiating him, the priest has to mutter the prayer to the
Rudras that commence with “ Rudrebhyah,” at the same
time performing the sacrifice divided into six parts.! ^

' Reading and translation are equally uncertain. The Comm. has
षडेव होमाः ५० gives an explanation that is net wholly satisfactory :

खद्राथां मचरावामेकाददथानामनुवाकानां अपः
WHE: | GR लाहा । इत्यव षडेव होमाः कायाः ॥ एण्या the

Is the same with the six 94१०७} ०६ ©. यना. 71, कन
Rote.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 182] =====
180

82, The king has to treat the Brahmans with milk-por-
ridge, honey, and ghee. The reward to be bestowed consists
of land, agreeably to the rule laid down by the eminent Seers
in reference to portents shown by trees.

33. Two or three lotuses, barley-ears, and such-like, grow-
ing on one stalk, presage the death of the owner. The same
is true of a germinated blossom or fruit.

84, Excessive growth of corn, and generic difference of
fruits and blossoms on one tree, intimate with certainty
a hostile inroad.

85. When seeamums yield only half the usual amount of
oil, or no oil at all, and. when food loses its flavour, then you
" may be sure an extreme ‘danger is impending.

36. A portentous blossom or fruit must be removed from
the village or town. At such an emergency a cooked obla-
tion is to be offered to Soms, or victim killed, for expiation.

87. On seeing unnatural signs in corn, the owner should
first bestow the field where ‘¢ grows to the Brahmans, and
then bring, in the midst of it, a boiled oblation to Earth
By eo doing one shall suffer no injury.

88. Want of rain causes dearth; too much rain gives rise

to danger of famine and foreign invasion; rain in the wrong
-eeason produces illness; and rain by a cloudless sky forebodes
death to the king.
_ 89. From an irregular change of heat and cold, and from
a disordered progress of the seasons, ensues after six months
unsafety to the realm, as well as horrible diseases engendered
by (the wrath of) Fate.

40. A continual rain during a week, and that out of season,
is followed by the death of the sovereign ; a blood rain pro-
duces war; a rain of flesh, bones, fat, and such like, produces

09.

41. You may hold danger to result from a rain of grain,
gold, barks, fruits, flowers, and the like. A town where it
rains charcoal and dust is going to perdition.

42, A rain of stones from a cloudless sky, or of monsters,
* or a (sudden) break in the midst of excessive rain, engenders
manifold calamities to the grains. ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 183] =====
181

43, [From a rain of milk, ghee, wax, curds, blood, and hot”
water,’ may be prophesied the ruin of the country ; and from
blood rain, strife between princes. ]

44. When no shadow is seen by bright sunshine, or the
shadow is seen iriverted, one may announce a very great peril
to be near.

45. When by day or night, in east or west, is seen a rain-
bow in a cloudless sky, there is great apprehension of famine.

46. It is said that at the time of a portentous rain, the
Sun, Moon, the Rain-god and Wind do co-operate. Dona-
tions of corn, food, and cows ought (in such cases) to be made,
by which the evil is assuaged.

47. The receding of rivers from a town, and the drying up
of never shallow rivers or other waters, like deep lakes, eto.,
produces desolation within a short time.

48. Rivers that carry fat, blood, or flesh, thet are troubled,
filthy, or run backwards, presage the approach, six months
hence, of a hostile. army.

49. Blazing, smoking, boiling, as well as weeping, shrieking,
singing, and talking of wells, are said to produce mortality
among the people.

50. The springing up of water without previous digging,
any change in the water’s smell and taste, or any portent in
reservoirs, denotes great danger. At such an emergency the
manner of expiation is as follows.

51. In case of water showing unnatural symptoms, Varuna
is to be worshipped with muttering of prayers addressed to
him. By such means the evil is allayed.

62, When women bring forth monstrosities, or two, three,

* four, and more children at a time, and long before or after
the usual period, ruin befalls the family or the country at large.

53. Mares, camels, buffaloes, oows; and elephants perish by
giving birth to twins. The effects of portentous births appear
in six months, Anent the expiation has Garga delivered the
following stanzas :—

“If a man is anxious of his own weal, he must

} ‘Ther. verigées la certalaly wrong; it shonld be chang8d intowéripa. `

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 184] =====
182

leave those women in a stranger's territory, satisfy the
Brahmans by fulfilling their wants, and cause expiatory
ceremonies appropriate to the occasion to be performed by
them.

55. “Quadrupeds ought to be dismissed from their flocks
(and brought) to foreign grounds. Else they will prove fatal
to the town, their owner, and flock.”

56. Qusadrupeds covering animals of totally different kind,
cows leaping upon one another, and a dog sucking a calf, these
are bad signs.

67. On such an emergency you may know for certain that
in three months a hostile inroad shall occur. To avert it,
Garga has taught the two stanzas that follow :—

658. “Parting with the animal, banishing or giving it away,
that will speedily expiate (the portent). At the same time
(the owner) must treat the Brahmans, and bid them perform
muttered prayers by way of sacrifice.

69. “The court priest offers a cooked oblation and a victim
to the Creator, with a prayer to the god, while food and fees _
in plenty are distributed.” °

60. When a carriage without the drawing animal moves
on, and one being drawn does not, or when the wheels stick
or give way on the road, then the kingdom is threatened.

61. When musical instruments sound without being struck,
. and give no sound at all when struck, or a wrong note, the
foe is approaching or the king about to die.

62. Tunes of song and sounds of musical instruments in the
sky, as well as unnatural transformations of movable and fixed
objects, presage death or discases; jarring instruracnt an-
nounces defeat at the hands of the enemy.

63. Where ox and plough get entangled, where spoons,
winnowing beskets and other implements show portentous
tokens, and where jackals are hooting, there is danger from
the sword. The Sege’s advice (with regard to the afore-
mentioned portents) runs thus:— .

64. “These serial portents producing themselves, the
monarch ought to honour the God of Air with fried flower,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 185] =====
183

and bid the Brahmans to devoutly mutter the five verses
beginning with ‘4 styo.” `

65. “He is to honour the Brahmans with milk, food, and
guerdons, They must likewise carefully perform sacrifices to
the Fire, the reward for which consists in plenty of food and
fees.”

66, 67. Town birds roaming in the forest and wild birds
entering the town without marks of fear; day birds roaming
by night and nocturnal ones by day; wild beasts or birds
forming circles at dawn and twilight, or ehricking with one
accord in a blasted quarter : all these bring danger.

68, 69. Threatening aleo are dogs wailing, as it were, at ~
the door; jackals yelling in vexed condition; a dove or owl
penetrating into a palace; a cock crowing at eve; the kokila
warbling early in winter; hawks and the like moving in the
sky in gyrations from right to left.

70. Assemblies of many birds on dwellings, holy trees,
triumphal arches and gates, as well as their coming up from
beehives, ant-hills, and lotuses, are forebodings of ruin.

71. Dogs carrying limbs of dead bodies and bones intoa _
room, intimate pestilence. Cattle or swords, when uttering
words, announce the king’s death. The Sage says:

72, 73, “When wild beasts and birds show unnatural
signs, one should make sacrifices to Fire, and give sacrificial
fees. Five Brahmans should mutter the prayer, ‘ Deodh
kapota,’* eto., and one Brahman the prayer * Su decd,’ ® ete.
Or they may use the sugural song for a prayer, and the
headings of the Atharva-veda.t The reward to bo given to
the priests consists of cows.” |

५ Reveds 7, 92. 1०५0 ० बायोरिति the author may bave written
चायो Uf, as the rules of Sandhi are not always observed before iti.
Yet qrafafit would be preferable.

* Reveda 10, 165.
® Valakhilya 6, 4 `
4 Utpala considers menevedacirénsi to be a Dvandva: HWY Ha: | -

जेदश्चिराखि अथरवध्रिरःप्रमुतीनि, ए ५० » ०००९७ would needs

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 186] =====
184

74. The falling down and breaking of Indra’s standard, of
door-bolts, columns, gates, door-leaves, arches, and ensigns,
foreshows the king’s death.

76. A strong glare at dawn and twilight, the sppearance
in woods of smoke without fire, the splitting of the earth -
without chasms being visible, and her trembling, give rise to
apprehension. ^

76, The country where the sovereign is attached to heretics
and atheists, immoral, irascible, envious, cruel, and bent on
making wars, that country comes to ruin.

77. Where little boys, with weapons, sticks and stones
in their hands, are fighting and uttering such cries as
“Strike! strike! cut! pierce!” there also is danger im-
pending." .

78. A dwelling where with charcoal, red chalk, and the
like, are drawn figures of monsters and ghosts, or which is
painted over by hobgoblins,* such a dwelling soon comes to
perdition. .

79. That house too meets ruin which is motley with cob-._
webs, not honoured at morn and evening, filled with quarrels,
and where the housewife is always sluttish.

80. When goblins show themselves, you may predict pesti-

“lence to be near at hand. For averting these evil tokens,
Garga has prescribed the following expiation :—

. 81. “The best expiations, in such a case, are oblations of
fruits, eto., and treats on a grand scale, which the king should

require some defining word. Maexsocds must be a Tstpurusha, and as
manah = mens, is “a spell,” and in so far syaonymous with brekmen,
and as the Atharvaveds is also called brahmavede, we may conclude that
maneveda Is one of the designations of that Veda.

° ००००. तथाच पराश्ररः ।

चदि घगुरसिकाहयोषटहस्ताः पुरं शि्यवो रणवत्समाचरन्ति ।
अहर इर बहीलुदाहरन्लो भयं जधिरार्तुसुखं निषेदथमि ॥

9 All MSS. have ndyake, which the Comm. explains to be grhasvfmi.
As the paseage, so interpreted, is unintelligible, I suppose that the word
nfyeke is to be taken in the acceptation of vindyake, although I am
wnable to addace any ether example of the word being thus used.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 187] =====
185

order, at the same time worshipping Indra with metrical
prayers addressed to the god.”

82. The appearance of portents at the time a monarch or
realm is destroyed, at the rise of a comet, and at an eclipse of
sun or moon, as well as their appearance in the proper season,
has no injurious effects.

83. Those phenomena that, as being natural effects of the
season, produce no mischief, may be known from the ensuing `
concise verses of Rehiputra’s :—

84, 85. “Lightning, thunderbolte, earthquakes, gleaming of
morning and evening, equalls of whirlwind, haloes, settings
and risings of the sun darkened by haze or vapour, the trees
bearing food, juice, oil, numerous flowers and fruits, increase
of rut with bulls and birds, are favourable tokens in the two
months of spring.”

86, 87. “In summer you may presage good on secing the
rivers dry up and the sky rosy at dawn and twilight, and
boisterous like a sea, or covered with a blaze not proceeding
from fire, with explosions, vapour, dust, and wind. The eky
may also appear stained by falling stars and meteors, and the
orb of Sun and Moon in it shine tawny.”

88, 89. “Rainbows, haloes, lightning; sprouting of sear
trees; trembling, upheaval, change in appearance, rambling
and splitting of the earth; rising, overflowing, and inundations
of lakes, rivers, and water reservoirs ; giving way of hills and
dwellings: all these are symptoms not dangerous in the rainy
season.”

90, 91. “The sight of celestial nymphs, spirits, gandharvas,
celestial chariots and prodigies; the appearance in the heavens
of planets, asterisms, and stars by day; strains of eong and
music in woods and on mountain edges; the luxuriant growth
of corn and the decrease of water, are, all of them, said to be
favourable in autumn.” .

92, 93. “Cool breezes, frost, noise of wild deer and birds,
the sight of giants, gnomes, and such-like beings, the sound
of an inhuman voice, the darkening of the horizon, canopy,
woods and mountains owing to hase, and high risings and
eottings of the sun, are held auspicious in winter.”

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 188] =====
186

94, 95. “Fall of snow, abnormal winds, the sight of
deformities and prodigies, a sky black like collyrium, streaked
yellow with falling stars and moteors; wonderful births from
women, cows, goats, horses, wild beasts and birds; strange
symptoms on leaves, sprouts, and twigs: all this is auspicious
in the dewy season.”

96. “ All these phenomena produce good in their own sea-

+ son, as being the natural concomitants of the season, but they

are most dreadful when appearing out of the season.”

97. “What madmen utter in their songs, children in their
talk, and women in their chattering, will never go amiss.”

98. “Indeed, truthful is that oracular voice; first the
goddess of speech walks amongst the gods before she descends
to men, and she speaks not unless incited.”

99. A clever observer of portents, should he be even devoid
of astronomical knowledge, will become a renowned man and
a favourite of the king. It is this mystery revealed by.the
Beers, by knowing which » man will be enabled to look into
past, present, and future. .

 

Cnarren XLVII.
Afiscellaneous.

1. In the preceding part of this work I have amply men-
tioned the good and evil influences of celestial and atmospheric
phenomena, chiefly when describing the planets’ courses, con-
junctions, conflicts, roads, eto.

2. “Hence Varaha-mihira ought not to treat the same
matter again, he professing to be 8 compendious author ;”
thus they will blame him and say: “ Men of science should
not give the chapter generally known by the designation of
‘Miscellaneous chsapter,! since it contains a repetition of already
mentioned effects.”

8. But it is the very character of this chapter to repeat
what has previously been told, and if I did not write it I
abould be no less liable to blame.

* Properly, “ motley as a peacock’s tall.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 189] =====
187 ^

4, All planets, if radiant and moving in the northern paths,
bring peace, abundance, and happiness; but the same, by
‘moving in the eouthern paths," and bereft of radiance, produce
famine, robbery, and death.

5. If Venus stands in Magh&, and Jupiter (at the same
time) in Pushya, monarchs will keep peace, and their subjects
enjoy happiness, mirth, and health.

6. If the planets, the Sun excepted, oppress Kyttiki, Magha,
Rohini, or JyeshthA, the western country is visited with dis-
tress.

7. If at evening the samo are stationed like a flag in the
east, there must needs be strife between the sovereigns of the
east; and if they are so disposed in midheaven, the middle
country is sure to come to grief. These effects, however,
only take place in case the planets sre coarse, not if they
ere bright and radiant.

8. By the planets occupying the southern quarters, the rain-
clouds in the Dekkhan get dispersed. War results from their
showing small and coarse, but peace is augured from their
appearing bulky and radiant. ~ `

9. By beaming brightly, while standing in the northern
road, they bring bliss to the kings in that quarter; by look-
ing small and ashy-hued, they will harm countries and princes
in that direction. "

10. When the stars of the lanar mansions and planets are
wrapped in smoke, flame, and sparks, or remain invisible
without assignable cause, the whole land and its:ruler.will
come to destruction.

11. When a brace of moons shine by day, then will
Brahmans soon thrive uncommonly well; two suns forebode
war between Kshatriyas; three, four, or more suns, announce
the world’s end. “~ †

12. A comet by coming in contact with the Seven Seers,
Abhijit, the Polestar, and Jyeshtha, destroys the rain-clouds,
is injurious to good actions; and brings sorrow. Avlesh&
being touched, the rain will certainly come to nought, and

° CL ch. ix, 14, र
† 14

.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 190] =====
188
the country, distracted and full of (fatherless) children, will

18. Saturn, by moving and retrograding in Kyttiké and
the next six lunar mansions, causes famine, violent danger,
discord amongst friends, and drought.’

14. If Saturn, Mars, or a comet crosses Rohint’s wain, need
I tell that the whole world shall perish in a sea of calamities P*

16. When a comet repeatedly appears or moves through
the whole of the asterisms, then shall the world, movable
and immovable, taste the bitter fruits of actions in a former
existence.

16, By showing the shape of a bow, and by being rough
and blood-coloured, the Moon threatens famine, announces
the moving on of armies, and victory on the side the string
of the bow is turned to. When her cusps are turned down-
wards, she is fatal to kine, and gives rise to the loss of the
crope. By flaming or smoking, she forebodes death to the
king.
17. When the Moon is sleek, large, showing equal horns,
broad, and standing high northward in the wild elephant’s ~
path,? when looked at by benign planets, and far removed
from the malign ones, she greatly promotes the happiness of
mankind,

18. If the Moon accomplishes her conjunction with Maghé,
AnuridhA, JyeshthA, Vicdkhd, or Citra, by approaching them
from the south, she is not auspicious. She is, on the other
hand, beneficial, if taking her course north or through the
midst of those asterisms.

* Comm. MUTE WH:

विखम्बितमतिः सौरः प्राग्दारेषु यदा भवेत्‌ ।
महाभयानि चल्वारि विजानीयात्‌ समन्ततः ।
अनावुष्टिं मयं चोरं दुर्मिंषं मिषविदहम्‌ ॥

9 ‘This stanza Is quoted in Pancatantra L. st. 240. Cf aleo ch. vi. 95
tx. 95, Comm. WETY Wa:

रोहिदीद्करं भोमो भिनर्वकेसुतो wat 1
चतुव जबतो ब्रूयात्‌ प्रजवं खमुपखितम ॥

* @ ०. ७. 1,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 191] =====
189

19. The cloudy horizontal line that crosses the Sun at
rising or setting is termed a “bar.”! An “inolosure” is
the same with a mock sun, and an airy staff* has the appear
ance of a straight rainbow. .

20. The long beams going up from the Sun at rising or
setting are the “unarring” beams? A fragmentary straight
rainbow is called the “red line” ;‘ the same, but longer, is
termed Airdvata.®

21. Twilight (of evening) is the time from the Sun’s diso
having half set upwards to the time when the stars become
distinctly visible; and (twilight of morning) is the time from
whence the stars begin to fade in lustre until the moment
the Sun has half risen.

22. From the aforesaid phenomens at twilight (of morning
and evening), one has to foretell good and evil. When all of
them appear sleek, there will be instant rain; when coarse,
there will be unsafety.

23. Rain is to be expected by an unbroken cloudy bar, a
, clear sky, darkish or sleek sunbeams, a bright rainbow,

lightning in the north-east, or when s tree-shaped cloud is
shoue upon by the Sun’s rays, or when a huge cloud shrouds -
the setting Sun.

24, In the country where the Sun seems broken off, wry,
blackish, amall, or marked with the figures of crows or other
inauspicious animals, and coarse, in that country it is almost
certain that the ruler is undune. " :

25. He whose army is followed by troops of carnivorous
birds when he is about to do battle, shall suffer a heavy
defeat; but if the birds are in advance, he shall triumph.

26. When at sunrise or sunset s Fata morgana in the shape
of an army obstructs the solar orb, then you may predict that
battle and peril draw near to the king. ^

27. A softly gleaming twilight, joined to a soft breeze and
the noise of unmolested birds and wild beasts, is lucky; one
that is obscured by dust, is lacking lustre, or shows a tinge
like blood, causes the ruin of the country.

" Ch. ch. xxx. 25, * Cf. ch. xxx. 16, * Ch ch. xxx 1.
१ ०८ ०. म्ण. 16, ==, 6८ ०, य. &, 8

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 192] =====
190

28. Herewith have I expounded, without repetition, all
that the Seers have more copiously stated. Even after hear-.
ing the kokile’s tune, the crow will not leave off crosking
for it is but its nature not to outdo the kokila.

ee
S » Cuarren XLVIIL
yt Royal Inauguration Ceremony.

n 1. The ruler is to the people what the root is to the tree.
woe ensues from the root being impaired, and
general weal follows from its being kept in good condition, the .
sovereign must, in the first place, be taken care of.

2. Now learn the propitiating ceremony, such as it has been
revealed by the Creator-for Indra’s sake to the teacher of the
gods (Brhaspati), and handed down by the latter to Vrddha- ©
Garga, who delivered it to Bhaguri.!

8. This inauguration ceremony,® than which no rite for

' ‘The pushyssnénam agrees in its general features with the royal
Inauguration ceremony as prescribed in Aitareya-Brihmaya vill. and
Catapatha-Br. v.; yet in the particulars there are important discre-
pancies.

® Utpala takes pushyesnénam to signify “the washing at (the con-
fanction of the Moon with) Pushya.” The period fixed upon for the
ceremony Is, indeed, the conjunction just named, but that is plainly done
pon the prisciple of semen omen. The original meaning Is that of
“ auspiciows washing,” for it was by no means necessary to perform the
rite at Pushya, though it was the more common course. The wrong
etymology is countenanced by these lines of Vrddha-Garga’s:

are feed: साधं खर्धमाना हि मानिनः।
परद्यरं महयं चक्रुः सये सुरासुराः ४
` लतो शैव्यमदैः कुरदेदवाः खे विनिर्जिताः ।
लतो -ङ्गिराः सुरयुखध्यानसक्नो -भवत्पुरा ॥
` पुरण्दराभिवेकार् गुहडातिरकसयत्‌ ।
तिषयमाद्मीजनथषं यस देवो वुहखतिः ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 193] =====
191

quelling evil portents is more efficacious, must be conducted
by the astrologer and the court priest.

4, 5. A fit place for the ceremony is some spot in a forest
covered with young trees, shrubs, creepers, and spreading
plants, abounding with lovely, sweet-smelling trees, with
unimpaired leaves and shoots; where no cordia, no beleric
myrobalan, no spinous, bitter, bad-smelling trees are found,
and where no inauspicious birds, like owls, vultures, etc., are
staying.

6, 7. Some woodskirt ringing with the noise of cocks,
pheasants, parrots, peacocks, woodpeckers, blue jays, green
Pigeons, sylvatio partridges, red partridges, franoolines,
canjulas,' doves, ¢rikas,® bees inebriated with ipping flower-
juice, kokilas, and others,—such a place also is adapted to the
Purpose ; as well as some pure building on consecrated ground.

8. Or one should perform the rite on beautiful sandy river
banks, scratched by the nails of aquatic birds, and as charm-
ing to eye and heart as the (swelling) haunches of sportful
damsels.

9, 10. Or near a lake azure as the clear aky, where dark .
lotuses are open like so many eyes, where skipping swans
form as it were a (white) umbrella, and ducks, ospreys, and
cranes raise their cries. Or a lake where the water-lilics,
like so many dameels, show their full-blown flowers like so
many faces, and their swelling buds like breasts, whilst they
seem to chatter in the melodious tones of warbling swans.

11. Or else one may perform the ceremony in a cow-station
that is gay with the lowing and frisking of young calves,
where the ground is covered with impressions of hoofs, dung,
and froth proceeding from kine ruminating,

तैन देवो -मिषिष्ठः @ Sree: goes |
लतो बं समारूढो नाश्यामाख दानवान्‌ ॥
Rare इष्टमनखः पुरो प्राष्वामरावतीम्‌।

पृष्वखानं बखतरं तदारभ्ब प्रवर्तितम्‌ ॥

* What kind of bird the venjula is I cannot tell ; @ synonymeus term
is khadiracescn. *. .

* According to the Comm. the griks Is the same as srikerpe.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 194] =====
192

12. Or on the seaside crowded with hsppily arrived
splendid ships, and showing a line half dark, half white, .
owing to the fishes and white birds lurking in the rotang.

13, Or in hermitages where the young ones of deer and
birds find a safe refuge, and a lion is subdued by a hind, like
_ wrath is quelled by patience.

14 Or in a house blessed with deereyed women with
voices sweet as the kokila’s, and with steps that betray them

_ to be hindered by the golden girdle, ankle rings and heavy
haunches they have to carry.

15. Or at hallowed shrines, bathing-places, in public
gardens, epots with beautiful scenery, on eome tract of land
sloping down to the north-east, and bounded by a stream ~
ranning in a direction from left to right."

16, 17. The soil, to be conducive to victory, must be hard,
good-smelling, sleek, sweet, plain, not covered with ashes, -
charcoal, bones, brackish spots, husks, hairs, cavities, lairs of
land-crabs, holes of porcupines and mice, and ant-hills. In
choosing an encampment for the troops, one has to follow.
the same rules as much as circumstances allow. ॥

18, 19. The astrologer, minister, and officiating priest
must set out by night from the town in an easterly, northerly,
or north-easterly direction, where, after preparing an oblation,
the priest devoutly and humbly performs the invocation,
presenting fried grains, whole barleyoorns, curds, and flowers.
The verses for the invocation, such as taught by the Seer, are:

20. “May they come! all the divine beings who are
desirous to receive our worship, the regents of the quarters,
the snakes, birds, and whosoever has a ahare in the offering.”

21. Having thus invocated them all, the pricet shall say :
“On obtaining our worship, they will dcpart to-morrow
morning, leaving their blessing to our sovereign.”

१ ~~ मवा नय

सोष्ाने नदीनां सङ्कमे मुभे ।
` महादे "अवा तीं देवतायतने "चवा ॥
। वने दिजवरयुते ।
शुदे रब्ये विवि्ि वा पुष्या समाचरेत्‌ 8

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 195] =====
193

22, After they have worshipped the invocated beings, they
are to stay there over night, to observe good and evil dreams,
agreeably to the rules laid down in the Yatra.

28. On the next morning, the ingredients for the rite,
which will presently be described, must be carried to the
designated spot. The following stanzas bearing upon the
subject have been delivered by the Seers:

24, 25, 26. “Then should the priest, by drawing a circle,
prepare the ground, to bo decked with various and numerous
gems; then divide the diagram into different compartments,
which he assigns severally to the Snakes, Yakshas, Gods,
Ancestors, Gandharvas, Nymphs, Seers, Blessed, Planets,
Lunar Mansions, Rudras, Mother Deities, Skanda, Vishnu,
Vigakha, the Guardians of the Eight Quarters, and the Wives
of the Gods.

27, 28. “Having marked them by different colours, he
must skilfully honour each of them, according to their rank,
with delicious fragrant perfumes, garlands, and ointments;
likewise with sweetmeats, and various other sorts of food, as
fruits, roote, flesh; and with different delicious beverages,
liquor, milk, wine, and the like.” .

29. I proceed to tell how the deities, whose names are
written down in the diagram, should be honoured. As to
the planete, one must keep to the rule stated in (the chapter
of the Yatra on) the offering to the planets.

80. The imps, demons, and children of darkness are
worshipped with flesh, boiled rice, wine, etc. ; the Ancestors,
with unguents, collyrium, oil, and also with flesh and boiled
Tice.

81. The Seers are honoured with passages from the Sama-,
Yajur-, and Rg-Veds, slong with perfumes, incense, and
garlands; the Snakes with colours not amalgamating with
one another,' with honey, ghee, and sugar.

82. The Gods are worshipped with incense, ghee, oblations
to fire, garlands, jewels, praises and signs of reverence;

“1 The rendering is doubtful ; Come. we aunt wareraae: e
, चोबो भाच्ितः। . * ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 196] =====
194

the Gandharvas and Nymphs, with most sweet-scented per-
fumes and garlands. .

38. The rest are treated with vari-coloured oblations. As

tokens of worship to all of them in general must be laid
down amulet strings, raiments, flags, ornaments, and saori-
Gicial strings.
34, 85. The priest then proceeds to kindle fire on the
sacrificial eminence, either on the western or southern side of
the circle, and bring up the ingredients, viz., long sprigs of
DAb-grass not yet in the bud, fried grains, ghee, whole
barleyoorns,' curds, honey, white mustard seeds, perfumes,
flowers, incense, orpiment, collyrium, sesamum, and sweet
fruits of the season.

36. Further there must be dishes of milk porridge and
ghee. It is with these ingredients the priest performs his
sacrifice on the western eminence, where the inauguration
is to take place.

37. In the corners are arranged strong water-jars, with
white yarn tied round their necks, and covered with sprouts
and fruits from such trees as yield a milky juice. ~

38, The jars contain water mixed with the substances for
the washing, and with gems. As to the substances for the
ceremony, they are enumerated in the following verses of
Garga’s.

39-42, “Into the water-jars one shall put the plants
Jyotishmatt,? TrdyamAnd, Abhayé, Aparajits, Jiva, Vigveg-

* The Comm. explains WWAT: by यवाः; ० लावाः be only re-
marks: NfweEr:

* The original names of the plants have been retained in the transla-
tien, in order to show that the choice of those plants is based upon the
principle of nemen omen. The place ef several among them Is not yet
determined. The Comm. gives a paraphrase that is not without value:
ष्योतिष्मर्ता सुप्रसि्चाम्‌ । चायमाणां प्रसिद्धाम्‌ अभयां हरीतकीम्‌ ~
अपराजितां अमी (1. अमा) । बीवां ीवन्नीम्‌ । विश्चे्वरी पद्यवा-
रिदीम्‌ । पाठो प्रखिद्धाम्‌ । खमङ्खां रल्नमल्न्ाम्‌ । विजयां वचाम्‌ ।
wut (vl et) weal । सहदेवीं (*1. "वा प्रसिद्धाम । पूर्दकोधां
अरखिचाम्‌ । रतावरी प्रसिदैव। अरि्टका प्रसिद्धाम्‌। भिवां प्रथिदधाम्‌।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 197] =====
195

vari, Pathé, Samang@, Vijaya, Seh&, Sahadevi, Parpakosha,
Gatavart, Arishtiké, Civé, Bhadr&, Brahmt, KshemA, Aja;
further all sorts of seed, gold, things held suspicious at
festivities, so far as procurable; all sorts of herbs and
flavours (gems, al} sorts of perfumes, fruits of Zigle mar-
melos and Flacourtia sapida, herbs with auspicious names,
gold and things used at festivities].1

48, “The priest shall spread out, first, the akin of a ball
with auspicious marks, who has died from old age. The
skin is to be laid go that the neck is turned to the east.

44. “Thereupon is put a red, unimpaired skin of a fighting
ball ; then, thirdly, » lion’s ekin, and thereon a tiger’s.

45. “These four skins should be spread out on the sscri-
ficial eminence when the moon is in conjunction with the
asterism of Pushya, and at a lucky hour.”

46. Upon the skins is to be placed « throne wrought of
gold, silver, or copper, or made from the wood of such trees
as yield a milky juice. ॥

47, The seat is raised a cubit, or one oubit and a quarter,
or one and a half, the first bringing luck to governors of
Provinces, the second to those princes who aspire to con-
quer their neighbours, and the third to those who wish to
lord it over a whole empire.

48, 49. The king shall lay a piece of gold on ‘the stool,
and then take his seat, cheerful, surrounded by his ministers,
intimates, priest, astrologer, burgesses, ‘and persons of an
auspicious name, while the solemn acclamations sent forth by
bards, citizens, and Brahmans, and the festive sounds of
tabors, horns, and musical instruments, quell all evil.

भद्रां बलाम्‌ । ब्राह्मीं प्रसिद्ाम्‌ । चेमां कटगुग्युखं चोरकमिति प्रसि-
WU अथां प्रसिद्धां भेचिरेडिकाचीमितीच्छनि ॥ मङ्गव्छामि दथ्यच-
शसुमनखादीनि ॥ meet eT Stee: | wet जवा जयन्ती
जीवपु पुनर्वा विष्डकरानता वाराही लचवा ॥ ।

: St. 42 contains a superfivous repetition of the three preceding; yet
the author may bave found the stanza in his copy of Garga’s work.

* The Comm. adduces as examples i Jayardja, Sinharija, Bandburija,
Vylghrartje. 7

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 198] =====
196

60. The court priest now wraps the king, who wears s

new linen garment, in a woollen blanket, and after making _

- a Libation, pours over him the contents of the jars filled with
1

61. The number of jars may be eight, or twenty-eight, or
a hundred and eight; the greater the number the greater
the efficacy. The prayer to be recited on the occasion, com-
posed by the Seer (Vrddha-Garga), here follows:

52, 53, “This gloesy liquid is identified with splendour ;
this is the best expeller of ill; this is the food of gods; on
it the worlds are founded. Whatever evil, earthly, atmo-
spherical or celestial, has reached thee, may it all come to
nought by contact with the shining liquid!” :

64. Then, taking off the woollen blanket, he sprinkles the
king with the water destined for the rite, mixed with fruits
and flowers, and recites this prayer : :

55-70. “May the gods sprinkle thee, and the Blessed
from all eternity, Brahma, Vishnu, Civa, the Sadhyas, the
hosts of Maruts, the sons of Aditi, Vasus, Rudras, the healing
Agvins, Aditi the Mother of Gods, Benediction, Perfection,
Eloquence, Glory, Fortune, Firmuess, Magnificence, Sinivali,
Kuh@, Danu, Suras4, Vinaté, and Kadru. So, too, may the
_ other Goddesses not named, the Mothers of Gods, and the
heavenly crowds of Nymphs sprinkle thee, all together.
The Lanar Asterisms, Hours, Halfmonths, Days, Chief Day
Periods, Years, Regents of the Days, Minutes, Seconds,
Moments, Bits,—these, and other divisions of Time, may
they graciously sprinkle thee. The Vaimfnikas, the celestial
Legions, Manus, Oceans, the Seven Seers with ‘Arundhati,
the Fixed Places,’ Marici, Atri, Pulaha, Pulastya, Kratu,
Angiras, Bhrgu, Sanstkuméra, Sanaka and eon,’ Sanitans,
Daksha, Jaigishavys, Bhalandans,‘ Ekats, Dvita, Trita,

1 In c0 much does the ceremony more resemble an anciatment than a
washing. .

ध them the Pole-star.

® Or Senandena 00 noun proper.

* CL the Var. rr.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 199] =====
197

Javili, Kacyape, Durvieas, Durvinita, Kapva, {ग्न
Markandeya, Dirghatapas, Cunageepe, Viddraths,
Samvartaka, Cyavans, Atri, Pardcara, Dvaipdyana, Yavakrite,
Devaraja, and his younger brother,—these, and other Seers in-
tent on wisdom and holiness, rich in purity, may they sprinkle,
thee, along with their pupils and wives. The Mountains,
Trees, Creepers, holy Shrines, the blessed Rivers, the Snakes,
Elves, blessed Vaikhinasas, Vaihiyasas, the Father of
Creatures, Diti, the Kine who are the Mothers of the Universe,
the heavenly Chariots, all the Worlds, changeable and un-
changeable, the Fires, Ancestors, Stars, Clouds, Sky, Regions,
‘Waters,—these, and many others whose names are hallowed,
may they graciously consecrate thee with water that destroys
all evil omens, and bestow on thee hail, long life, and health !”

71, These are the verses recited, as well as others pre-
scribed in the ritual of the Atharva-veds, and the prayers
called Rudragana, Kishminda, Mahdrauhina, Kuberahydaya
(or Kuberabydya), and Samyddhi.!

72. The washing finished, the king has to put on a brace
of cotton garments, over which have been muttered (by way”
of benediction) the three verses beginning with Apo Ai shthd,
and the four commencing with Hiranyavarndh.*

73. The monarch, after taking water and honouring the
deities, his gurus and the Brahmans, and also the royal
umbrella, standard, and weapons, amidst jubilations and blow-
ing of horns, proceeds to do his personal devotion.*

००००. एकाद शानुवाका CT! कुष्माण्डः षडगुवाकाः कृष्माष्डाः।
BETCHA aA | BACT TMT TAT Aboot the atx
Asuvike verses termed Kishmipda, ef. Skr. Dict. of B. aad R. L. v.3
about Mabfrauhipa, cf. |. v. rexhipe Lc. What ross are called
Kuberabydaya and Samyddhi is unknown to me.

® Atharva-veda 1, 5, 1, ogg., aad 1, 83, 1, ogg. It may be remarked
that the former mextra has in our editions of the A.V. not three but
four verses. An inaccuracy of the author's is that he indicates Airep-
yeverse, instead of hirenyeverpdh.

* Comm. WERRESTATHT, i.e. commending bhuself te the pre-
tection of his guardian deity.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 200] =====
198

74. He pate on his baw Sclomphel ear which has
been consecrated with the three verses: Ayushyam varcasyam -
rdyasposham, eto.' .

75, 76. He now goes to the other sacrificial eminence, and
seats himself upon skins, which must be spread out, one

: above the other, in this order: Ist, a bull’s skin; 2nd, a
cat’s; 3rd, an antelope’s; 4th, a porcine deer’s; 5th, a lion’s
skin; and 6th, a tiger’s.

77, The court priest presents on the principal place an `
offering to Fire, made up of fuel, sesamum, ghee, eto., at the
game time addressing prayers to Rudra, Indra, Brhaspati,
Vishnu, and the Wind.

78. The astrologer expounds the foretokens of the fire, in `
the manner indicated in the chapter on Indra’s banner. All
being finished, the court priest, joining his hands in euppli-
cation, says: ॥

79. “All the multitudes of divine beings, now that they
have received worship at the hands of the king, and bestowed
on him unbounded success, may they depart to return another _
“time |” .

80. The monarch then honours the astrologer and court

" priest with many gifts; farther, such other persons as can

claim rewards, Brahmans skilled in the ceremonial, and

others, according to their deserts.

81. He must issue an amnesty to his people, relieve the
victims in the slaughter places, and free the prisoners ax-
cepting those guilty of high treason. |

82, A repeated performance of this ceremony at the time
of the Moon’s conjunction with Pushya makes pleasure,
renown and wealth increase. When the same propitiating
rite is performed at any other conjuncture, it will, according
to ancient authorities, yield but half the (desired) results.
` 88. “The auspicious washing ceremony may be performed
at s time when evil portents and calamities are afflicting the
realm, at the time of eclipses, the appearing of a comet, and
8 planetary conflict.

* Vajasancyi-8, 24, 50-52,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 201] =====
199

84. “There is no portent on earth that cannot be assuaged
by it, and there is no solemnity that can excel it.

85. “ This rite is very salutary at the king’s inauguration,
and aleo when he aspires to the rank of an emperor, or when
he is longing for the birth of a son.

86. “It was for the sake of mighty Indra that Brhaspati,
of world-wide fame, taught this extraordinary washing, which
is conducive to long life, increase of progeny and popularity.

87. “He who in the same manner causes his horses and
elephants to be washed, shall see those parts of his forces free
from disease and attaining the highest efficiency.”

 

9
owt
Cuarrsn XLIX, =>

Signs of Gold Diadems.

1. The lucky and unlucky signs of gold diadems that
have been amply described by the Masters, are here enume-
rated by me, and that completely, though in = succinct
manner. : : ^

2. The diadem of » king must, to be suspicious, have an
expansion of eight digits in the middle; a queen’s should,
scoording to prescription, be seven digits; and s prince
royal’s, six.

8, The diadem of a commander of the troops has an ex-
pansion of four digits in the middle, and a diadem bestowed
by way of royal favour! two.’ These are the five kinds of
diadems known.

4, All have a length double of the expansion, whereas the
expansion on both sides is half that of the middle. All
should be wrought from pure gold for the sake of increasing
bliss.

5. A royal disdem has five crests; a prince royal’s, or

9 Cl, Rathtearit-Shgare, ix. 54, 9331
ae: nfs wat Pret qa)
अचिेनापती पटं बद्धा रीरपूरयत्‌ ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 202] =====
200

queen’s, has three. A chief commander’s diadem has one
erest; a diadem bestowed as a mark of royal favour has
none,

6. When the gold plate for the diadem in being wrought
easily expands, it bodes success and victory to the king, and

happiness to the people.

7. A flaw in the middle produces loss of life and kingdom.
A diadem having « split in the middle must be cast away;
one that shows a burst on the sides, gives trouble.

8. At the appearance of evil tokens, the diviner has to pre-
scribe an expiation for the king. A diadem with auspicious
signs is conducive to the weal of king and land.

Onarrzz L.
Signs of Swords.

1, A sword of the longest description measures fifty digits;
the shortest is of twenty-five digits. A flaw on such a spot
(of the sword) as corresponds with an odd number of digits,
must be deemed ill-ominous.

2. Yet flaws resembling a Bilva-fruit, VardhamAna-figure,
umbrella, emblem of Civa, earring, lotus, banner, weapon, or
cross, are held auspicious.

3. Flaws shaped like a lizard, crow, heron, carrion bird,
headless trunk or scorpion, and several flaws along the upper
edge, are not lucky.

4, Acword that shows a chink, is too short, blunt, damaged
at the upper edge, unpleasing to eye and mind, and without
tone, is inauspicious. The reverse qualities forebode favourable
results.

5. The rattling of a sword (of itself) is said to portend
death ; its not going out of the sheath (when drawn)! augurs
defeat. There will be strife when the sword jumps out of the
acabbard by itself, but victory when it is seen flaming.

6. The king ought not to unsheath it without reason, nor
rab it, nor look at his own face in it, nor tell its price. He
* Kn the text wo should read TCWWTUTHY, as the Comm. bas it.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 203] =====
201

should not mention the place whence it has come from, nor
take its measure, nor, without precaution, touch the blade.!

7 The most esteemed swords are those that are fashioned
like a cow's tongue,  lotus-petal, a bambu-leaf, an oleander ~
leaf, rapiers and scimitars.

8. If a wrought sword proves too long, it may not be
shortened by striking off a portion of it, but should be polished
till it has the length required. The owner dies if  picce is
struck off at the upper end, and his mother dies if the same
is done at the point.

9. From a flaw on the hilt you may infer the existence of
8 corresponding flaw on the blade, just as you may conclude
on seeing a mole in the face of a damsel, that there is another
such in her hidden parts,

10, And by observing which part of the body is touched
by a swordsman, when consulting the diviner, the latter will
be able to indicate the place of the flaw on the sword in
the scabbard, provided he (the diviner) knows the following
rules,

11-15, If the man touches his head, the flaw is at the first
digit; the second digit corresponds with the forehead; the
third with the spot between the brows; the fourth with the
eyes; the fifth with the nose; the sixth with the lips; the
seventh with the cheeks ; the eighth with the jaws; the ninth
with the ears; the tenth with the neck; the eleventh with the
shoulders; the twelfth with the breast; the thirteenth with
the armpits; the fourteenth with the paps; the fifteenth with
the heart; the sixteenth with the belly; the seventeenth
with the loins; the eighteenth with the navel; the nineteenth
with the abdomen ; the twentieth with the hip; the twenty-
first with the pudendum; the twenty-second with the
thighs; the twenty-fourth with the knoes ; the twenty-fifth
with the legs; the twenty-sixth with the part between the
legs; the twenty-seventh with the ankles; the
eighth with the heels; the twenty-ninth with the feet; the
thirtieth with the toes: such is the theory of Garga.

४ CL. the passage णड निम 95 १००६७ in the (0०69969 95 9६. 94. ;

Digitized 7 Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 204] =====
202 ——

16-19. The consequences to be foretold from a flaw in the
firet, second, third digit, and so forth, up to the thirtieth
digit, are as follows: death of a child, obtaining of wealth,
loes of riches, good fortune, captivity, birth of a son, quarrels,
acquiring of elephants, death of a child, acquiring of wealth,
destruction, getting a wife, grief, gain, loss, getting a wife,
death, prosperity, death, contentment, loss of wealth, acquiring
of riches, death without salvation,’ obtaining of wealth, death,
good fortune, poverty, dominion, death, kingly power.

20. Upwards of the thirtieth it no consequences are
specified; in general, however, the flaws at the odd digits are
injurious, at the even ones auspicious. But according to some
authorities, the flaws from the thirtieth digit upwards to the
sword’s point are of no consequence at all.

* 21. A sword that smells like oleander, blue lotus, elephant’s
frontal juice, ghee, saffron, jessamine, or Michelia champaka,
brings good luck; but ill-omened is one that has the odour
of cow urine, mud, or fat.

22, A smell similar to that of tortoise blubber, blood, or
potash, augurs danger and pein. A sword glittering like
beryl, gold, and lightning, brings victory, health, and pro-

sperity.

28. The fluid to imbrue a sword with, according to the
precept of Ucanas, is: blood, if one wishes for a splendid
fortune; ghoe, if one is desirous to have a virtuous son;
water, if one is longing for inexhaustible wealth.

24. An approved mixture to imbrue the sword with, in case
of one desirous to attain his object by wicked means, is: milk
from a mare, a camel, and elephant. A mixture of fish bile,
deer-milk, horse-milk, and goat-milk, blended with toddy, ~
will make the sword fit to cut an elephant’s trank.*

2 The Comm. has eniroépi, and explains it by mrtys.

* Comm. TUTY TUN: |

अथ पाथनानि । चीरपाथितमरिवधार्षीं धारयेत्‌ तिवतिलारना-
छाग्बामधोार्थी । पथां दकेन । सर्पिषा भरीकामः। साहसिकः शोखितेव।
इसवशचाद्रषीरः भिलाञारण्डेदकामो -वाचीरेव ताखवंशथोमत्छवः

दिरदखछन्बद्डेदकानो निवचनं -अपपुष्यगन्धयचछुपहाः

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 205] =====
208

26. A sword, first rubbed with oil, and then imbrued with’
A> unguent compounded of the milky juice of the Calotropia,
goat's horn, ink, dung from doves and mice, and afterwards
whetted, is fit for piercing stones, ~

26. An iron instrament imbrued with s stale mixtare of
‘Potash of plantains with buttermilk, and Properly whetted,
will not get crooked on a stone, nor blunted on other iron
instruments.

 

Oxarren LI.

. 4rt of Boothsaying.

1. The soothsayer must tell » consulting person’s fortune
by observing the latter's direction, utterances, place, what
the same is taking into his hand, and which limb of his own
or another's he is touching ; conjointly with this the diviner
should intelligently consider the time being. For Time,

2. The place (of consultation) is favourable if it is level,
covered with good grass, pleasing in the limpidity of its
sweet water, covered with beautiful flowers or corn, fre-
quented by Gods, Seers, Brahmans, virtuous men, and Blessed

Redfern धिरचतुप्ाधिनं सयोतरावमनेत गचोष्किढः सयुर
द्थोफुवाच्नानिमित्ते विवुगुयात्र करीरेतराख yet ब्रूथादिति (= \.
कोडितेनाख मखं षिवुगुयादिति)॥ ०८५.6.

" This chapter Is probably भूषय) 986 वषया of the Comm.
Quoted ia the Var. rr.

* The passage in Partcara which has obviously served es the model,
reese thos s XQ Gy CUT Crat aerrat erat -ercran सर्वदा
सवेदर्थो गुभासुभेलत्फलसूचषः । सविेषेण प्राणिनां Brey

wnbriqarareanmthiratertetatatirk: फथममिदर्थवति ।
तक्रयतो ईेवप्नो “नुपहतमतिरषधार्यं SUTTON water

शुदहाथमर्थिनां सुभायुभागामयानां भावाभावममिनिर्दिेत्‌॥
४6

| Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 206] =====
(inhabitants of Heaven), and if it is shadowed by trees of
suspicious appellation, charming in their bloom, loaded with
many fruits, possessed of sleek barks and leaves, and not
cocupied by ill-omened birds.'

8. Not good is a place abounding with such trees as are
out, split, perforated by insects, thorny, scorched, rough,
crooked, bearing unseemly * names, inhabited by ill-ominous
birds, and covered with sear and withered leaves and barks.

4. Unfavourable aleo are: a cemetery, desolate shrine,
crossway, a dismal rugged spot, an always brackish ground,
& spot covered with sieepings, charcoal, poteherds, ashes,
husks, or dry grass. . .

6. Bad is, besides, any place, when occupied by monka,
naked friars, barbers, enemies, shackles, butchers, outcasts,
gamblers, ascetics, or persons in distress; moreover, any
place where weapons of spirits are being sold.*

6. East, north, and north-east are the directions ‘ of good
augury to the consultiag person; not so north-west, west,
‘south, south-east and south-west. The favourable time is
forenoon, not night, nor dawn, nor twilight, ‘nor afternoon.

* ¥, The same good or evil tokens as expounded in the rules
.` * Comm. UTS TUTTT:

धैबिततद्च्छायोनुढे सस्यकमुमहरितमुदुशाद्लसिक्तमुष्टदयप्रसत्रस-
fwerran® (देथ) देवपिसि्चसापुदधिबावासे प्राद्युखोतरमुत्तरपू-
चाभिमुखो बा चः पुष्येत्‌ तद्ध प्रार्धितोपपत्तिमभिनिदिशेत्‌ 4

* ag. vibhitake, vetesa. ,

* Comm. HUTS WUTC:
 feaaryparerraaqanra feaarefratatfrarmye-
जामाद्भितपादपच्छाथे श्म्रालमून्यायतमचत्वरोपररिपुणापितायु-
अमयविक्रयशाखासु नैकतापेययाम्यवाश्णवायव्या्ाभिमुखः प्रचो-
इयत्‌ तच्येडमर्मनधाय विद्यात्‌ ॥

* Le. to be faced at.

© Pertcara: ;

जेलाः स्वाः प्र खमे qe परिपुच्ताम्‌।
-खण्ध्वयोरपराष्ेतु चपायां तु (”. च) विमर्हिताः॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 207] =====
205

for journeys, must in this case be interpreted, and that from.
observing what object is placed before the inquirer, or seen in
his hand, his coat, or what is being carried by the crowd.

8, 9, 10. The masculine’ limbs are: thigh, lip, pap,
testicle, foot, tooth, arm, hand, cheek, hair, throat, nail,
thumb, temple, armpit, shoulder, ear, anus, and joint.
Feminine are: brow, nose, buttock, wrinkles, hip, line of
felicity in the palm, finger, tongue, neck, instep, ankle, leg,
navel, margin of the ear, and hindpart of the neck. Neuter
are: mouth, back, collarbone, knee, bone, side, heart, palate,
eye, penis, breast, end of the spine, head and forehead,

- Touching of a limb of the first description, foreshows speedy
results; touching of one of the second kind, denotes slow
results; the touching of neuter limbs produces no effects
whatever ; nor do the other two, if they happen to be coarse,
impaired, broken, or lean.

11. When the querist touches or moves his great toe, he is
to suffer from eyesore; when he touches or moves a finger,
one may announce sorrow on account of his daughter; when
he strikes his head, there threatens danger from the king.

12, His touching the breast, presages separation; his
taking off a piece of cloth from his body, denotes loss; when
he pulls piece of cloth closer to him, and joins foot to foot,
he will get friends.

13. When he scratches the earth with his great toe, he is

of land; when he scratches -his feet with the hand,
his thoughts are fixed on a female slave.

14, If the man looks at a tal- or birch-leaf, he is thinking
of muslin ; if he is standing on glass, husks, bone, or ashes,
sickness is soon to befall him; if he gazes on a string, net,
or bark, captivity awaits him.

15, 16. Should he mention or see long pepper, black pepper,
ginger, cyperus grass, lodh, costus, cloth, andropogon, cumin,
spikenard, anise, and Tabernssmontana, one may foretell that
his thoughts are engaged on the following subjects, severally:
& wife's fault, » man’s fault, a person in distress, loss of all,

" Le. denoted by words of masculine gender.

Digitized » Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 208] =====
206

missing of the road, loss of a child, of wealth, of grain, of a
child, of bipeds, of quadrupeds, of land.

17. From his keeping in the hand a fruit of the Indian
figtree, of Bassia, ebony-tree, roseapple, waved-leaved figtree,
mango, and jujube,' it may bo predicted that he is to acquire
wealth, gold, men, iron, muslin, silver, and copper.

18, The sight of a dish filled with grain and a full water-
pot, augurs the thriving of the family; excrements of an
elephant, cow, or dog, denote the loss of wealth, women, or
friends (severally).

19. On seeing cattle, an elephant, buffalo, lotus blossom,
silver, or a tiger, the querist is destined to get a multitude
of sheep, riches, garments, sandal, silk, or ornaments (suo-
cessively).

20. When a fortune-teller is consulted by persons in the
sight of a skull-wearing Qaiva monk, they do so for the
sake of friends or gambling; when in the sight of a friar of
@ decent order, their query concerns a courtesan, king, or
wife in childbed.

21. The consultation being held in the sight of a Buddhist
monk, a teacher, a Jaina monk, a naked mendicant friar, a
diviner, a pedlar,* a fisher, it concerns s thief, a commander
of the troops, s merchant, a female slave, s soldier, a ehop-
keeper, a condemned criminal.

22, From the sight of an ascetic is to be inferred that the
inquirer is thinking of an abeent person; he is thinking of
cattle tending, if » vendor of liquors is in sight. From the

* Tor. in the text BTA, ०१९०० ० जाति.

* That simitte must be understood to mean ssimittike, appears not
ealy from the Commentary, but also from the corresponding passage of
एर; निर्चन्वदरदने दासीपृच्छां। वुरश्रावकदर्धने मिचदुतषतां `
वा। च्राख्यष्ठ चौरहृतं । परित्राजकस्व मुपमूतिकागणिकाधा वा।
खपाध्यायस्व चमूपतिढत।। भैगमस् भरषितां । नेमिन्तिकद्य योधा्धा।
अतो वाणिजका । रुष्डवुत्तीनां विपद्रा्धा । तापसस्त प्ोषिताधीा।

श्रौष्छिकख पमुपालना्धा । कवर्तख वध्वथातहताम्‌- एर ०४०
in this passage is of after a compound, as if the component parts were

separated. ~

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 209] =====
207

sight of one busy with gleaning, you may conclude that
mishap has befallen the querist.

23. The man using the expression: “T should like to ask,”
it denotes him to think of » meeting; the expression “do;
tell!” shows he is thinking of his houschold; the words:
“ Master! pray, look!” intimate the man to think of gain ;
the expression “do, prophecy!” shows that he cares for
dominion.

24. If he eays, “inform me,” his thoughts are bent on
victory or travelling. Should he say: “examine, and tell
my thoughts,” then his care concerns a kinsman. If he
suddenly rushes upon the diviner, who is standing among 8
crowd, with the word “look!” be is thinking of © thine `

25, 26, By an intarnal part of the body being touched, s
member of the family is indicated to be the thief; by an
external part being touched, a stranger is indicated; by ४
motion of the great toe, a slave is referred to; by the other
toes, a fomale slave; by the legs, s domestic; by the navel, a
sister; by the heart, one’s own wife; by touching the thumb,
a eon is denounced ; by the fingers, a daughter; by the belly,
one’s mother; by the head, one’s father or uncle; by the
right arm, one’s brother ; by the left arm, a brother’s wife. = -

27, 28. Indications that the inquirer is not destined to
recover the property stolen from him, are the following: if,
after touching an internal part of the body, he takes to an
external one; or if he emits phlegm, urine, excrements; or
suffers something to drop from his hands; or vehemently
bends and stretches his limbs; or if he descrics people
carrying empty vessels, or a thief; or if ominous words are
heard, such as “‘taken, fallen, impaired, forgotten, lost,
broken, gene, stolen, dead,” and the like.!

29. The aforesaid signs, when combined with the sight of

* ८००. तचाच पराशरः

Weary Get wet Haines वा तिष्मपुरोवनस्वानां कु्वी-
wenat feftrrrate arerfg wr रूढोरथेत्‌ चतदतपतितमुषितवि-

Ware, fouresa-
Wet ete weerent fears ~“ -

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 210] =====
208

husks, bohes, poison, eto., or with’ the sound of weeping snd ^

sneezing, portend death to men attacked by illness. When
the querist, on sharply touching an internal part of the body,
breaks wind upwards, then you may foretell that he is
satiated by having copiously dined.

30. From his touching the forehead and from seeing awns,
you may infer boiled rice has been his food ; from his
touching the breast, king's rice; from his touching the neck,
a preparation of barley.

81. If he touches his loins, paps, belly, or knees, he is

sare to have eaten pease, milk, sesamum, or rice gruel.
From his smacking and licking his lips, you may know that
he has tasted something sweet.
- 82. By something loathsome,! he will stretch his tongue;
by something sour, he will make s wry mouth; by some-
thing pungent, bitter, tart, or hot, he will hiccough, and by.
something salt, spit.

88. If he gives up phlegm, it is a sign that ho has eaten
something dry and bitter, and that in little quantity. The
sound or sight of a carnivorous animal is a token of his
having enjoyed fleehmeat; if he touches his brows, cheeks,
+ of lips, he has eaten fowl.

84. His touching the head, throat, hair, jaw, temple, ear,
leg, abdomen, proves him to have taken elephant's. flesh,
buffalo’s flesh, mutton, pork, beef, hare’s fleah, deer’s flesh,
mixed meat.

86. When an evil augury is seen or heard, you may fore-
tell that he has eaten lizard’s flesh and fish. In similar
manner may, at the time of consultation, the deliverance of
& pregnant woman be prognosticated. ~

86, Whether a male, female, or androgynous child is to
take birth; is foreshown by something masculine, feminine,
or neuter being seen, inferred, present, and touched. A
happy deliverance is augured from the sight of drink, food,
flowers, and fruits. ,

87. When s woman touches with the thumb her eyebrow,

 », elerkee, as ene MB. of the Comm. has it, instead of visprkke.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 211] =====
209

‘belly, oF finger, she is thinking of the child she expects; 30,
too, when, honey, ghee, gold, gems, corals, or the woman's
mother, nurse, or children, are before her eyes. व

. _ 88 Should a pregnant woman uphold her belly with

hand while an evil omen is seen, she will miscarry ; 80, too,
if sho withdraws her belly from the pressure of the stool,! or
joins one hand to the other. ‘ ॥

89. When she touches the right nostril, you may foretell
that she is to conceive next month; when she touches the
left nostril or the left ear, her pregnancy is to begin after two
months; when it is the right ear, two months will elapee
before that occurrence; and when it is the breasts, four
months, :

40. She will give birth to three sons and two daughters if
it is the lower part of her hair-knot ehe touches; five sons,
if it is the ears; three sons, if it is the hand. The thumb
being touched, it denotes five sons; the forefinger, four; and
80 on in succession. The great toe and both ankles denote
one daughter. :

41. She is to be mother of a couple of girls or of boys
according to her touching either the left or the right thigh, and
the mother of four or three children according to her touching
the middle or the end of her forehead.

42, 48. Head, forehead, brows, ears, cheeks, jaws, teeth,
neck, right* shoulder, left shoulder, hands, chin, pipe of the
lungs, breast, right pap, left pap, heart, right side, left side,
. belly, hip, joint of the holy bene, right thigh, left thigh,
knees, legs, feet ; each of these parts of the body corresponds

* ‘The translation Is doubtful ; the corresponding passage in Paricara

५०4; पीठमर्द वानरा छलवोद्रं कष्डुचेदग्रहखं हइसेनामिनुद्य वा

* Itis not clear what is meant, in this passage, with plthamardakes
apparently a cushion.

* It is most strange that in the foregoing stanza the word sssys Is
used in the acceptation of “left,” but here of “right.” The former
passage Is an imitation of Paricare’s words: Efqareray Ut owt
दैव कन्यके जनयिष्यसि। वामस्य तिलः कन्यका ut gets the latter
१००८०६० 7० ददित प्राकणशुग्धाम्‌ । उसरपथां वामे 8

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 212] =====
90 = |॥.4/
with one of the twenty-eight lunar asterisms beginning with
1

44, Herewith have we clearly expounded the prognostics
from limbs being touched, after we had duly studied the.
authoritative works, with the view of attaining the results
wished for. He who knows all this, and is not deficient in
intelligence and alertness, shall always be honoured by the
king and the multitude.

* Consequently the head being touched, the child will be born at
Kyttikt, and soon. Partcara: fUTfa WR Uieary we fart!
लाड रोदिषछां शुवोमुगधिरि। द. आ, । | .

(ॐ 6 क)

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 213] =====
au > Vi. 27g

Onarrer LIIL!
On Architecture. .

1. To gratify clever astrologers, I now proceed to compose
a work on the art of building, such as it has been transmitted
from the Oreator to our days, through an unbroken series of
sages.! ~

1 ‘The preceding chapter, on boils and their consequences, has been
omitted, the contents thereof being of no interest whatever.

* According to Utpala: Garga, etc.; more explicit is the statement
in o work bearing the title of (ri-Brahmokta-Vicvakarmaprakécika
(se. gstra), where we read, 13, 10, ०११, ६ ,

इति मोक वासुधास्त्ं पुं यमाय धीमते ।

अमात्पराश्नरः प्राप तद्ञात्माप बुहद्रषः॥

चुषद्रथादिश्चकमा ाप्तवान्वाशुधाखकम्‌ ।

ख विश्चकर्मा जयतो हितायाकवयत्पुनः ॥

वासुदेवादिषु पुनरमुलोकं भक्कितो “्रवीत्‌ ।

अथ ख विमलवियो विश्चकमा महाम्मा

खकशमुदवरिष्टः सरवश्नाखा्थवेन्ता ।

खकलसुरगणा्नां सूबधारः छताग्मा

भवमनिवसतां सच्छा स्रभेतच्चकार ॥ .
This passage, with many others, shows that Gargs, Parkcara, and the
like, are mere mythological beings, of exactly the same historical
value with Brahman, Vicvakarman, Vasudeva; cf. ch. 1. 3, footnote.
In the opening stanzas of the Vicvak. we find:

Ugh wa पुव wregmet germ ` .

| Digitized 7 Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 214] =====
212

2. There was, it is affirmed, some Being obstructing with
his bulk both worlds, but on a sudden he was subdued by the
host of gods and hurled down.

8. Of the several parts of his body, each is subjected to the
particular deity by which it was attacked. It is that Being
of immortal substance, who by the Creator was destined to
be the dwelling-house personified (akas House-spirit).

4. The largest of the five houses of a king should be of
108 cubits (Aasta) in width; the following, of 100, 92, 84,
76. The length always exceeds the width by one-quarter
(is, consequently : 136, 125, 115, 105, 95)

5. The first mansion of a commander-in-chief measures
64 cubits in breadth; the next following, six cubits less, and
soon. The length of each is equal to the width augmented
by one-sixth. ^

6. The five houses of a minister have a breadth of 60, 56,
52, 48, 44, severally; the length is equal to the width in-
creased by one-eighth. The dimension of the dwellings of
& queen is half that of a minister's.

7. The width of the first mansion of & prince royal is of
80 cubits, which number must be diminished by six for each
subsequent house ; the length is equal to the width increased
by one-third. The measures for the dwellings of the
younger princes are half those for the prince royal.

8. The measure for the houses of provincial governors,
high-born men and king’s officers,' is equal to the difference

WUNG RE FUTAT FETT: ry w frets:
© firmer want हिताय प्रोवाच qret बङभेदयुकल्षम्‌ ॥
fewatirary

वास्तुधाखं प्रयच्छामि लोकानां हितकाम्यया ।
‘The Vicvak. seoms te be a compilation, for most of the passages quoted
bby Utpala, either from what be terms Kirapikbya-Tantra, or from
Garga, from Brhaspati, Vigvakarman himself, Kicyape, etc., recur in
the Vicvak., a copy of which is in the translator’s possession. Cf. at.
30, footnote.
‘The wording of the text would admit of translation, “ provincial

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 215] =====
|

 

 

218

between the numbers assigned to a king and a minister.
The difference between the numbers for s King’s and a
prince royal’s houses, gives the measure for the dwellings
of guardians of the interior apartments, courtesans, ‘and
artisans.

9. The houses of all inspectors and functionaries have the
same dimensions with the king’s treasury and pleasure-
house. The difference between the numbers stated for a
Prince royal and « minister, gives the measure for overscers
of manufactories and envoys. ,

10. The first house of a court astrologer, king’s priest, or
physician, has 40 cubits in breadth, to which number must
be added four for each subsequent house; the length is equal
to the width increased by one-sixth.

11. It will be well to determine the height of a build-
ing 80 8 to coincide with the breadth. Of buildings con-
sisting of a sole room, the length may be double the width.
~ 12, The breadth of the houses of a private man from one

of the four classes is 82 cubits, which must be diminished - -

by four for each next following, down to 16.) A lower
amount of cubits is only for the very lowest people.

18. The length amounts to the breadth ++s, in the case
of Brahmans; to the same +4, in the case of Kehatriyas;
to the same +4, for Vaigyas; and to the width increased by
2, for (adras, .
guvernors and superior king’s officers.” As in st. 14, réjapurushe
denotes a person of much Inferior rank, such > translation would seem,
preferable. Bat the Comm. takes the words as we have dose above,
and the parallel passage in Vicvak. has:

गुपमन्विगृहायाच अन्तरे यत्ममादम्‌ ।
खामन्तराजपुषाखां वराया गुहं सुतम्‌ b

"The parport of this elliptical, or rather wholly inadequately ex-
Pressed statement Is, that « private Brahman may have five houses,
the first of 89, the second of 28, the third of 94, the fifth 6f 16.3 0
private Kshatriya may bave four houses, of 28, 94, 20, and 16९ re-
spectively; a private Vaicya three, of 24, 20 and 16 respectively; a
Private CAdra may have two dwellings, of 30'and 16c. in breadth,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 216] =====
“^

214

14. The treasury and pleasure-house have a dimension
equal to the difference between the numbers assigned to the
thouses of the king and of the chief commander. The dif-
ference between the measure for a chief commander and

_ that of a private man from one of the four classes, gives the

measure for king’s officers.'

15. The dwellings of persons from mixed classes, like
Paracavas, eto.,* have dimensions equal to half the sum of
the measures for the two classes (to whose intermingling
they owe their origin). A house, the dimension whereof is
either below or above the legitimate one, occasions evil
to all.

16. There is no fixed measure for cattle houses, monas-
teries, granarice, arsenals, and firerooms, but the authorities
in architecture do not approve of a height upwards of 100
cubits.

17. Add the number of 70 to those for the breadth of the
wansions of the king and the commander-in-chief. Write
down the sum, at two places. Divide it, at one place, by 14;
this gives the measure for a hall. Divide the same sum by
85; the quotient is the measure of the terrace,®

1 ‘That is to say: if an officer belongs to the Brahmanical class, the
difference meant Is that between the measure of the chief commander’s
house and a ‘private Brahman’s ; if an officer be a Kshatriya, we are
Girected to subtract the number allotted to a private Kshatriya’s house
from the measare of the commander’s mansion ; and so forth.

* The Piracava class traces, theoretically, or rather fancifully, its

‘erigia to the intermarriage of a Brahman and a Qidra woman. The ~

measure for the former being 82, for the latter 20, it fullows that a
Paracava’s house measares “1% = 36 in breadth.—Comm. WT"

शूद्राणां wre: area: 1 et Seareat erat Aa: (v. LTT: we
» भू्कष्डः) । चधियायां जातो मूधावयिह्ञः । (४० dove not wholly
agree with Manu’s theory.
© ‘The same is more plalnly expressed in Vicvak.
प्रभितं लेकधाखं तु शुभदं तत्‌ प्रकीर्तितम्‌ ।
शेनापतिचुपादीणां सप्तत्या सिते ति ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 217] =====
215

18. In the houses of 82 cubits’ width (being those of
Private Brahmans, eto.), the halls are 4 cub. 17 digits;
4 cub. 8 dig.; 3 cub. 15 dig.; 3 oub. 18 dig.; and 8 cub.
4 digite. .

19, The terraces for the same are, with steady amount
of decrease: 3 cubits, 19 digits; 8 cub. 8 dig.; 2 oub.
20 dig.; 2 oub. 18 dig. ; and 2 cub. 3 digits,

20. Outside the dwelling one should make a gallery, being
in width o third part of the hall. If the gallery be in front
(and to the east), such a building is termed one with s
tarban. ,

21, Where the gallery is behind, the house is styled one
with « back-support ;! where it is on the sides, the building
is one with side supports; where there are galleries all
around, the edifice is said to be a well-supported one. All
of them are approved by the authorities in architecture.*

. श्वासे चतुद शते धालामानं विनिर्दिेत्‌ ।
प्ंचिशयुते "्वषाजिन्दमानं भवेत्‌ ॥
About clinds the Comm. hes: अलिन्दशब्देन धचालामि्तेवष्नि वा
गमनिका जालकावुताङ्गयसम्मुखा शक्वियते a The word might as well -
be rendered by ‘balcony,’ ‘ gallery.’

"In the text UTETAHE is a misprint for GTITAA; apéereye is
properly “ anything to fall back upon, a support from behind ;” faxther,
@ pillow upon which the hind part of the head is resting; eg. la `
Dugakumira, 90,13, *

* Comm.: TUTE FSTITR WA

श्रालातो चद्तीर्या्रसेन काया तु वीचिका।
चथयतो भवेदीधौ सोष्णीषं भाम तद्ुहम्‌ ४
पञ्चात्‌ खापाञ्रयं गम खावटखचं तु पायोः ।
खमन्ता्यदि थाता खा तदा सुखितमुख्वति ॥
‘The Vigvak. has here with some variation In the wording:
भ्रालाजिमागतुख्ाच कर्ग्वा वीचिका बहिः ।

भवनात्पू्वतो “व्यीषं 0) पशात्सापाजयं भवेत्‌ ।
weet wring सर्वव सुखितं भवेत्‌ ।- `

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 218] =====
216

22. The height of (the first storey of) the edifioe must be a
sixteenth of the width, with eddition of four cubits! The
altitude of each following storey is to be lessened by one-
twelfth. :

93. A sixteenth part of the breadth gives the measure for
the wall of all buildings made of bricks; as for houses of
wood, there is no choice.* ~

94. Add to the number of cubits assigned to the houses of

` 9 king and a chief commander (as well as others mentioned

in at. 6-9) one-eleventh, then seventy. Equal to this sum, in
digits, is the height of the door; half of it gives the width.

25. In the case of private Brahmans, eto., take one-fifth
of the number of cubits, adding 18; to this sum again edd
one-eighth. The resulting number expresses the width of
the door in digits; the height is thrice the width.*

96. The thickness of the two side-frames of a door is as
many digits as the altitude numbers cubits. Once and a half
that measure gives the thickness of the threshold and upper
timber.

97. The breadth of all four is equal to an cighticth part

Consequently, the breadth of the king’s house being 108, the height
will amount tol? + 4 cobites making 10 cab, 18 digits.

* 8. म्‌ विकल्पः ¢" खविकस्यः

94 rough measaring only Is intended; eg. the first house of the
king wambers 108 cubits; to this we should add 10, being nearly yy
of 108} to the sum 118 adding 70, we get 168; the door then is 168
digits high. As for private persons, the first house of a Brabman has a
breadth of 89 cubits, We are directed to take ove-fifth of it, but the
meaning Is, we should roughly take 6; adding 18 to it, we get 245 -
again adding ty = 3, we get 37, being the number of digits for the
width of the door; the beight comes to 81—Instead of Fig read
Fiegee, the Vigvak. bas:

quawrafirqerenitin: witger |
अशुखानि दवारमानं प्रवदन्ति मवीषिदः 8
विप्रादीनां तथा खार्वि्रतिस्ङ्कुखानि च ।
AICS [are] wath चिनुलोकशाषमुष्ते ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 219] =====
217

of seven times the door’s height. . The eightieth part of nine
times the altitude (of the storey) gives the width of a column
at the bottom; this diminished by one-tenth is the width of
the column at the top.

28. A column with wholly square shaft is termed Rucaka ;
one with eight angles, a Diamond; one with sixteen sides, a
Double-diamond; one with thirty-two angles, a “grooved
column”; a round one is called a Cylinder.

29. When you divide the whole column into nine parts,
one part will be the pedestal; the second, the base. The
capital and aleo the upper lip must be made so as to form
one part, each of them.

80. Equal to the thickness of the column is that of the
architraves; the thickness of the superior crose-beams and
upper rafters is lessened by one quarter, again and again® -

81. An edifice with uninterrupted terraces on every side is
termed Sarvatobhadra (i.e. goodly on every side); such a one
is fit for kings and gods; and ought to have four entrances.

82. Nandyavarta‘ is the name of a building with terraces
that from the wall of the room extend to the extremity in s
direction from east to south (alias from left to right). It
must have doors on every side, except the west.

83. The Vardhamina has a terrace before the (chief) en-
trance, extending to the end; then, when you proceed in a
direction from left to right, another beautiful terrace, and

*Comm.: TUTY FACUTR we
विभव्ध नवधा खयं कुयादुदहनं चरम्‌
कमलं चोरों तु मामे-माजे प्रकल्पयेत्‌ ॥

Almost the same in Vicvak.; all this is exceedingly vague. CL Rim
Rés, Archit. 2. 98, ५१. .
* This stanza and the following occar also In the Vicvak.; as stanzas
in Ary are found nowhere else in that work, the verses must have

been taken from our author.

* Cf. Bim Rés, Arch. p. 93, where Sarvatobhadra is the term te
denote a village built cpon aa analogous principle.

* Both this and the three following terms denote certain figures.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 220] =====
218

thereon, again, another in the aforesaid direction. No
southern door should be made in it.

34. The Svastika is auspicious, if it have the entrance on
the east side, and one continual terrace along the west side,
at the ends whereof begin two other terraces going from
west to east, while between the extremities of the latter lies
a fourth terrace."

85. The Rucaka hasa western and eastern terrace running
to the end, and between their extremities two others. A
northern door in it brings evil; doors on any other side are

ausp’
` 86. The NandyAvarta and Vardhamina are the very best
of all; the Svastike and Rucaka are of middling quality ;
the Servatobhadra is suitable for kings and the like.

37. An edifice with three halls, wanting as it does a
northern hall, is styled Hiranyanabha, and insures luck.
One without an eastern hall is named Sukshetra, and brings

ty. .

88. A building lacking a southern hall is called Culli; it
causes loss of property. One in which there is no western
hall, the so-called Pakshaghna, occasions the loss of children
and enmity.

389, 40, 41. A house with only a western and southern `
hall is termed Siddhartha; one with a western and northern
hall, Yamas(rya; with a northern and eastern, Danda; with
an eastern and southern, Vata; with an eastern and western,
Grhacullt; with a southern and northern hall, Kaca. In
Siddhirtha there will be acquisition of money; in Yama-
afrys, the death of the householder; in Danda, death by

- way of punishment; in Vita there is always excitement

occasioned by quarrels; in Culli, will be loss of property,
and in KAca discord amongst kindred.
42. In order to divide (the ground-plan of a house) into:

° & विधूत for वियुत, ० सुभदम्‌. ००५०५. तथाच मेः
` .षचिमो "मतो "लिन्द प्रागकौ तरौ तदुतियितौ । `
अन्वस्तकच्ये विधुतः प्राग््ारं खस्तिकं शुभम्‌ ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 221] =====
219

eighty-one squares, draw ten lines from east to west, and
ten others from north to south. Thirteen deities occupy the
interior ; thirty-two are stationed in the outer compartments.*

48. (The latter are:) Agni, Parjanya, Jeyanta, Indra,
Sarya, Satya, Bhyya, Antarikeha, and Anils, the first-named
occupying the corner in the north-east, and the rest. (the
compartments from the top to the bottom) in regular suo-
cession, while Anila keeps the south-east corner.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Roga| Ahi | Mu. Bid So. i Adi Diti| Agni
PIE dela pA bien
0) ne स Jere | apc (‰८ ०४८८
As (>| क्ट 1.1 Ar | Ap ere |
Varyena | > | 21 |> 4 jan | Seiye |
Kasay ra ahm (>| man Sef ve |
Sugriva ए | Vir >< ne | Biche |
(०८ Jefe (न Ya 9. | vi DS ance
Pit \Mrga| raja ter jm ath|tathal Pa. |A%

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

44, 45. Then follow Pdshan, Vitatha, Brhatkehata, Yama,
Gandharva, Bhyngardja, Mrga, the Pitars, Dauvarika, Su-
grive, Kusumadanta, Varupa, Asura, (osha, Papayakshman,
Roga, occupying the north-west corner, Ahi, Mukhya, Bhal-
lata, Soma, Bhujaga, Aditi, and Diti.

Bee the above Diagram, and ef. Rim Rés, Arch. p. 41; footnote,
p- 42, 1. 31, ००११ ¦ 7. «६, 1. 8, ०९११.

* However strange it may seem that N.E. should be presided ever by
Agni, aad the 8.E. by Wind, there can be no. doubt about the anthor’s -
meaning; the proufs are to be found in st. 49.aad 63,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 222] =====
46, 47. In the centre is Brahman, occupying nine squares ;
east of him Aryaman ; to the south of whom, at the interval *
of one compartment, is placed Savitar ; at the same interval

(proceeding westward) from the latter, Vivasvant. Then
+ , follow Indra, Mitra, Rajayakehman, Pythvidhara, and Ape-
vatea. These are all stationed round Brahman.

48. In the intermediate compartment (between Apavates
and Agni), in the north-east direction, is placed Apah ; south-
east (between Savitar and Anila), Savitra ; south-west, Jaya;
north-west, Rudra.

49. Apab, Apavatea, Parjanya, Agni, and Diti form a group
of deities ocoupying one compartment each, in the north-
western corner. In the same manner there are five deities,
each of them possessing one compartment, in the other corners.

50. The remaining exterior deities, twenty in number,
have two squares each. Finally, to the share of the four
deities, Aryaman, Vivasvant, Mitra, and Pythvidhara, are
allotted three compartments, severally, in the east, south,
and eo forth. ^ :

51. The spirit of the house area has his head directed
north-westwards and his face turned downwards. His head
ia held by Agni, his face by Apah, his (right) pap by Arya-
man, and his chest by Apavatea.

62. Parjanya and the (three) next exterior deities occupy
his (right) eye, ear, bosom, and shoulder. Satya and the
four subsequent lie on his (right) arm; Savitar and SAvitra
on his (right) hand.

63. Vitatha and Bhrhatkshata are stationed on his side; -
Vivasvant on the belly; the thigh is occupied by Yama;
the knee by Gandharva, the lower leg by Bhyngardja, and
the hip by Mrgs. -

54. In the eame manner as these are stationed on the right _
side; the other deities (such as have been specified) have their
place on the left.! The penis is taken by Indra and Jayanta;*
the heart by Brahman ; and the foot by the Pitars.

1 Bg. Prthvidbare on the left pep; Diti on the left eye;
* In the diagram, Jays.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 223] =====
221

55. One may also, should one prefer it, divide the area
into sixty-four compartments, and draw, besides, oblique
lines from angle to angle. Of this area Brahman possceses
four squares, and each of the deities, placed in oblique diréo-

tion near him,

half a square.!

 

BS

A. | ate se. @ (<|

 

>< |

 

वि 1. cat | me | Jay

 

 

 

 

ok
(न

Mi | Bratman Azy

 

 

010 | Brahms | |= |
अन | Ver

 

~

 

"hn rie [tend me fad | | |

 

111

(>

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

66. The eight standing in the extreme oomers, have to
their share half a compartment, and those next to them on

_ both sides have

one and a half. The remaining twenty out

of those enumerated possess two squares.

57. The meeting points of the longer diagonals and the
very middle points of the compartments must be considered
the vulnerable epots,* which one will do wisely not to hurt

68. ‘When those parts are injured by impure vessels, bolts,

* Geo Diagram

* Comm. : Warat

above.

Digitized by Google ।

fi

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 224] =====
222

pillars, and the like, as well as by (what is termed) ® ,
“wounding point,” they cause suffering to the house-owner
at the corresponding member of his body.

~ 69. That member of the body where the householder feels
an itching, or that spot where at a sacrifice an evil omen is
produced, or where the fire shows unnatural symptoms, con-
tains a wounding point.

_ 60. If the wounding point consists of wood, there will be
loss of wealth ; if it is something made of bone, there will
be suffering amongst cattle, disease and unsafety. [If the
point is something of iron, there is danger from the sword ;
ekullbones and hairs denote death.]

[61. If it is charcoal, you may predict unsafety on account
of thieves; if it is ashes, continual danger from fire. In
fact, any wounding point, unless it be gold or silver, on 6
vulnerable spot, is most disastrous. ]

(62. A heap of chaff, whether found on a vulnerable
spot, or on any other, prevents the acquisition of wealth.]
A peg, also, on a vulnerable spot, is mischievous.

63, 64. The nine meeting points of the lines drawn from
Roga to Anila, from the Pitars to Agni, from Vitatha to

from Mukhya to Bhyga, from Jayanta to Bhrngardje,
and from Aditi to Sugriva, are declared to be the excessively

. vulnerable spots. The dimension of vulnerable spot is set

down at one-eighth of a compartment.

65. A long diagonal has in breadth as many digits as each

square numbers cubits. The measure of a vein' is stated to
be one and a half the breadth of a diagonal.
66. The houscholder, if he is anxious to be happy, should

weary fircraret
एतच्चतुष्टयं प्रोक्त Toyawat मनीषिभिः ॥
‘The general name, however, Is vense see below, st. 63, 99.

+ 0. रोाहायुम्‌ इत्यादिकं Greg व्॑रन्देमोच्छति ॥ सिरा

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 225] =====
|

 

223

carefully preserve Brahman, who is stationed in the centre
of the dwelling, from injury by remains of food and the like,
lest he should come to grief. ^

67. When the house-spirit has lost his right arm, loes‘of
wealth and faults of the housewife are denoted by it. Loes
of the left arm forebodes loss of property and corn, When
his head be hurt, one is to lose all advantages.

68, Faults in the wife, death of a son and servitude will
result from an organ being impaired. Where the housc-
spirit is unimpaired, the inmates will enjoy honour, wealth,
and pleasures, . ,

69. In the manner aforesaid deities are stationed in all
houses, towns, and villages, where Brahmans and the other
classes must be established according to their respective
rank. : .

70. The dwelling-houses of the Brahmans are situated to
the north, of the Kehatriyas to the east, and so on with the
rest. They are, moreover, made in such a way that on enter-
ing the door you have (the greater part of) the space of the
house to your right. : :

71, According to the doors etanding on different portions
of the outline of the ground plan, whether of nine times nine

ब्देन पूषोपराथता दभिणोत्षरायताख दश-दश रेखा शचेयाः । 40
those diagonals and veins have their own names, a list of which is
given by Utpela.

* The came is far more clearly indicated in Rim Rész, Arch. p. 46:
“If the froat of the house be ten paces in length, the entrance should
be between five on the right and fuur on the left.” Differently Utpala :

तथाच कार्याणि यणा भवनं गृहाभनमरमद्कवं विद्चतां तानेव
चाखगृदहाणि दधिद्तो दचिणस्तां दिशि भवन्ति । एतदु भवति ।
WNYSS Farge (१1. °खामार दारमुल्तरामिमुखं कार्यम्‌ ।
दकिथाभिमुखस्छ AR | पञथिमाभिमुखद् दषिवाभिनुखम्‌ ।
उत्तराभिमुखयख्व पश्चिमाभिमुखमिति a How « house can be sald to
face the cast, without having its door facing the same quarter, ls beyond
our comprehension, ~ १० DO oe

- Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 226] =====
224

or of 64 squares, the consequences vary; thus, to begin |
with the door in the north-eastern corner, indicated here
below

72. Danger from fire, birth of a girl, abundant wealth,
favour with the monarch, wrathfulness, falsehood, and
thievishness (are the results of the door standing) east-
wards.

78. Few sons, servitude, lowness, increase of food, drink
and progeny, cruelty, ungratefulness, poverty, and loss of
children and strength (are the consequences, if the door
stands) southwards.

74. Suffering of a son, increase of enemies, no acquisition
of wealth or sons, happy possession of sons, wealth and power,
riches, danger from the king, loes of wealth, and sickness
(await the owner, where the door faces the) west.

75. Death or captivity, increase of enemies, acquisition of
wealth and sons, happy possession of all good things, getting
eons and wealth, enmity with one’s own son, faults in the
wife, and poverty (may be expected wherp the door is placed
on the northern edge).

76. A door being hindered by a road, tree, corner, well,
column or water spring, brings ill luck; but on its being re-
moved to a distance equal to twice its height, it will not do
any harm.

77. A door that is impeded by the road is destructive; one
that is hindered by a tree will be noxious to boys; a door
with mud before it threatens grief; when water is flowing
near it, expenses are predicted.

78. A door being injured by a well occasions epilepsy; by
a temple, destruction; by « column, failings of the house-
wife. Where a door faces Brahman,’ the family will perish.

79. A door which opens of itself produces madness; one

! There is a long inquiry ia the Comm., ia order to find out how to
reconcile this statement with that in st. 75. The upshet Is that the one
ennnot by any means be made to agree with the other. It has been
pelnted out more than ence that Variha-mibira bas the habit of ua-
qritically copying his authorities.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 227] =====
226 `

that closes of itself, ruin of the family. A door whose di-
mensions are too large causes danger from the king; a low
one forebodes robbery and brings calamity.

80. A door placed above another, and one that is too nar-
Tow, promises no good; a somewhat yawning one threatens
famine ; 9 curved one destroys the family.

81, A door being excessively pinohed (by the threshold)
gives rise to distress; one that is bent inwards tends to
evil; one bent outwards causes absence from home; ane

standing awry in regard to the quarters produces vexation by
* robbers. ॥

82. One should not have the principal entrance out-done
by other doors, owing to a loftier appearance of the latter,
and must richly ornament it with suspicious objects, as water-
pots, fruit, foliage, images of goblins, and the like,

83. Outside the house are stationed in the intermediate
quarters, north-east, south-east, eto., the following (female
spirits): Carakt, Vidirt, Pitand, and Bakshast? ;

84. The angles (north-east, eto.) in towns, villages, and
houses, are attended with evils for those who abide there, but
Persons of the lowest tribes, Cvapsces and such like,’ will
prosper in them.

85. The wavy-leaved fig, the banyan, the glomerous fig,
and the holy fig-treo are trees of evil sugury if growing on-

" Other anthorities of superstition know eight spirits Comm. Wy-
खरान्वरेष्व्टौ पदान्ते ॥ तथाच
एथान्धां चरकी मोक्ता ere: neared: |
पूतना भते श्रेया जम्बुकः पथचिमे खितः ॥
शाषसी चानिले कोदे पिशिपिष्डखवो्रे ।
Aad
खछब्दो "धमा जग्मका्छः (1. अगु) पिजिपिच्छखवापरः।
माश्यादिदिकषतुष्के “च निवसन्ति महायहाः ॥

Cf. also Sugrota IL. p. 882 seg.

° ५०८., चपचा दोनवाः। आदियहवाशष्छायपुदायादणः।

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 228] =====
226

the south side, west side, eto. (of the house), but are auspicious
in the north, east, and £0 on." नि .

86. Thorny trees near the dwelling occasion unsafety from
the enemy ; milky ones presage ruin of wealth ; fruit-trees
destroy posterity. Their timber aleo should be avoided.

87. In case one should not wish to cut those trees, one has
to sow amidst them others held to be of good augury, such as
Punnig, Agoka, Azadiracht, Mimusope, bread-fruit tree, Sami,
Shorea.

88. A level ground, sweet, of good odour, decked with
good herbe, trees, and plants, emooth and not fall of cavities,
bestows happiness on those even who come to rest themselves
on it from the fatigue of travel; how much more then on
those who have a permanent home on it P

89, 90. The neighbourhood of « minister's residence brings
loes of wealth; of a cheat’s house, death of a son; of a
temple, agitation; of a cross-way, ill repute; of a holy tree,
danger from planetary influences; of ant-hills or holes,
calamities; of a well, thirst; of o mound in the shape of a
tortoise-back, loss of wealth.

Q1. A declivity on the north side is deemed Gt for Brah-
mans; one on the east, for Kshatriyas, and eo forth. But
there are those aleo who opine that Brahmans may dwell in
any direction, and the other classes according to their rank.*

92. (To try the fitness of the ground) let one dig in the
middle of the house site » pit s cubit in diameter and in ~
depth, and afterwards return the earth into it. If, then, the

॥ The word predakshipens serves ouly to Indicate that from the south
ene bas to go onward In a direction which follows the course of the sun.

® ‘This elliptical phrase is explained by the 0०००.; विपो ब्राह्मणः
खच स्यां भूमौ बेत्‌ उ्तरपूददिवपश्विमायामिनि । अन्वेषां
अचियादीनामचे्ठमगुकमिद भोमनम्‌ । तयथा पू्सवा दविथसवा
चङिमखवा दचियाथाम्‌ । ०० The latter rule totally upsets the
former, and it has been rightly sald by Rim Rés, Arch. 161 “The
petaclple on which these distinctlons are founded Is altogether wugatory.”
CE, alee the latter part of stanza 95.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 229] =====
227

earth prove insufficient, it is a bad sign; if it takes up the
same space, it is indifferently good; should it be more than

sufficient, it bespeaks luck.
93. Or fill the pit with water. If, having walked « hundred

paces, you find, on returning, the water not diminished, it is
a lucky token; which it is also, when an ddhaka (of earth
dug out) weighs sixty-four padas.'

94. Or (put into a vessel four lamps); where the wick of ४
lamp that has been put into a vessel of unbaked clay, and
placed in a peculiar quarter within the pit, shines longer
(than the other wicks), the ground is fit for the class (to
which the quarter is assigned).

95. The ground where a flower appropriated to one of the
classes, after being left lying in a pit for one night, does not
fade, is fit for the class (whose colour corresponds to the hue
of the flower). In general, the soil will be suitable to any
one whose mind is pleased with it.*

96. A white soil is favourable to Brahmans; a red one to

' To read, as the Comm. has It: Warf UTerrTee.
* Comm.: UTS ii
Wve रचिता भूमिभवेततु गुहकर्मयि ।
wert we खनेग्धध्ये इसमां सममततः ॥
were पूरयेत्तेन पांसुना सुविचचशः।
वर्धमाने च वुद्धि स्याद्धीयमाने विगर्हिता a
साग्ये साम्यं विनिर्देश्रमथवान्बदिषारणम्‌ ।
पूरचिलायवा अथं मुचि: ऋमशतं व्रजेत्‌ ॥
पथं ्वादागमायावत्‌ खा भूमिस्तु प्रष्ठ ।
तस्तु धारयेच्छरथे चिचमाखमगुक्रमात्‌ ।
य्िराण्व्लायते मायं radars चावसेत्‌ ।
आमे वा मुख्ये पाच दीपवर्तिषतु्टथयम्‌ ॥
यस्तां दिभि प्रल्वलति चिर तद्यैव सा शुभा ।
The Vicvak. 1, 61, sqq., contains the same rules, but in other words.
Part of the corresponding passage from KAcyape is translated is Rim

Rés, Arch. p. 17
17

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 230] =====
228

Kehatriyas; a yellow one to Vaicyas; and a black one to
Qddras.- A smell like ghee, blood, food and spirituous
liquor, denotes a ground suited to Brahmans and the rest,
in succession. .

97. A soil covered with sacrificial grass, Cara, bent grass
and Saccharum spontaneum, promotes the weal of the classes
respectively. Likewise « sweet, astringent, sour and pungent
earth.

98. At a period indicated by the astrologer, let the house-
owner go to a piece of ground which has been ploughed,
abounds with seed grown up, has served for s reeting-place
of cows, or has got the approval of the Brahmans.

99. He has to worship the deities with various sorts of
sweotmeats, with curds, unground berley-corns, fragrant
flowers and incenses, and to pay honour to the architects
and Brahmans.

100. Then—touching his head, if he be a Brahman; the
breast, if a Kshatriya; the thigh, if » Vaicya; the foot, if a
Cidra—let him draw a line, the first act, when a house is to
be built,

101. It is allowed to make the line by means of the thumb,
middle finger, or forefinger, as well as by means of gold,
precious stone, silver, pearl, curds, fruits, flowers, or un-
ground barley-corns.

102. A line scratched with sword causes death by the
sword; with an iron object, captivity; with ashes, danger
from fire; with grass, danger from robbers; and with wood,
danger from the king. ~

103. A crooked line, drawn with the foot, oocasions danger
from the sword and troubles; #0 also does # deformed line.
One made by means of leather, charcoal, a bone or tooth,
brings misfortune upon him that makes it.

"104, Hostility may be predicted from # line being scratched
from right to left; good luck, from one being drawn from
left to right. Harsh words, spitting and sneesing (during
the act) are said to be inauspicious.

105. When the edifice is half-built or -finished, let the
architect enter it and observe the omens, on what spot the
house-owner happens to stand, and what limb he is touching.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 231] =====
———

 

229

106. Should, on that moment, an ominous bird, being
scorched by the sun,' emit hoarse eounds, you msy predict
that on the spot (where the house-owner is stationed) there is
a bone of a member corresponding to the methber fouched.*

107. And by other animals, like elephants, ‘harses, dogs,
shricking in return at the time of augury, may be known
that the specified spot contains a bone from such an‘ animal `
and belonging to a corresponding limb of the body.

108. The sound of an ass when the measuring line is being
extended announces that there is a bone hidden. You may
predict that there will be another “wounding point” (as it is
termed), on seeing a dog or jackal leaping over the measuring
line.

109. When a bird of augury sweetly warbles in s quiet
quarter, then it may be foretold that a treasure lies hidden at
the corresponding spot, or in that part of the house-spirit’s
body upon which the owner is standing.

110. By the measuring line enapping asunder may be pre-
dicted death; by the plug drooping its top, great sickness;
by the house-owner and architect falling short in their
memory, death. ‘

111. The waterpot dropping from the shoulder forebodes
headache; its being overturned, calamity in the family; its
getting broken, death of the workmen; its slipping from the
hands, death of the house-owner.

112. Having made an oblation, one has to lay the first
stone in the south-east angle, and then, proceeding from left
to right, the rest. Similarly the pillars ought to be raised.

118. The pillar must be raised, decorated with an umbrella,
garlands, cloth, scented with incense, and smeared with

" ie., facing the quarter in which the sua is standing at that period.
The eastern quarter Is “scorched” (dipte, pridipts) from saurise ण
wards to the end of the first prahare; during the same period the
Rorth-east Is termed engérix, the south-east dhdmin or dhdmite, the
rest pfnte. Cf. ch. 86, 12.

*Comm.: CWATTATAL ध

Tara’ quent wey सृति खकम्‌ । `
भुवो धखत्ममावेन प्ख दूवाशदङ्वम्‌ ॥ =,

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 232] =====
230

wnguent. The erecting of the door should be performed, ,
with all care, in the eame manner.! :
114. The consequences of pillars ehaking, falling, standing

"1 Em Garge, as quoted by the Comm, we find this solemn Iay 1 ।

धिषान्धासय्व मन्नोर्यं निर्दिष्टो मुनिभिः पुरा।

wig नब्दय वाचि वसुभिखासुभिः प्रजाः।

अचे भार्गवदायादे प्रजानां भद्रमावह ॥

प .श्िरसदायदे पूर्यवामाः परजाः कुद ।

भद्ध काश्चपदायादे प्रजानां भद्रमावह ॥

खर्ववोजसमाथुतति सर्वबन्धौ वधिमूते ।

WTC A TY MATT रम्यतां गुहे

प्रजापतिसुते देवि चतुरे महीसुते ।

gad gat देवि गुहे कापि रम्यताम्‌ ॥

पुचिति परमाचरधिेन्वमाश्रक्ुते ।
भव भूतिकरी देवि मुहे भा्ेवि रम्यताम्‌ ॥
अवद्धे याचते पू मुनेरङ्गिरसः सुते ।
इष्टके लवं प्रयच्छेष्टं प्रतिष्ठां गुहि कड ॥
प्मामस्वामिपुरस्वामि गृहस्वामि परि गरहे।
मगुष्यपनुहसवश्चघनवुद्धिकरी भव ॥

trike fact that these stones or bricks are held to be goddesses, in their
eocence at least, and that their fathers are the sages Augiras, Vasishths,
ete., may be recommended to the attention of those who adhere to the

ered of Encmeres concerning mythology. In Vigvak. we meet with
analogous spells, c.g.

, नामिति च मन्तेव ख्जिरो भवेति धे तथा ।

आनं च ततः कु्वादाममोकतिन मन्रवित्‌ ४

- भब्दे लं IEA पुंल ल्वामच खापयाम्यहम्‌ ।

Wrens fire Ser aA aT: a

आयुः ral fire रेहि देववासिनि नन्दिनि ।

असिन्डंसा लया काया प्राखारे चन्रतो मम ॥
‘The twe prayers indicated are VAj. 8. 20, 9, and 11, 44.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 233] =====
231

feebly, and of birds alighting on them, are the same with
those specified at the banner of Indra, where the good omens
have been enumerated at the same time.

115. A dwelling too elevated on the north-east side causes
the loes of property and sons; one that has s bed smell, the
death of a son; one that is not straight, destruction of kins-
men. In o habitation which does not face any distinct

+ quarter, no children will bo born. `

116. Let him who is anxious for the weal of his house
raise the soil on every side to the same level; and if there
must needs be a fault, let it be on the east or north side. -

117. If an elevation is to be found in the east, there will
be enmity with friends; if in the south, peril of death; if in
the west, loss of wealth ; if in the north, heart-burning.

118. A chapel is to be made in the north-east ; a kitchen
in the south-east; a (room for) vessels and utensils in the
south-west ; @ treasury and granary in the north-west.

119. By water being found to the east, south-east, eto., of
s habitation, the results will be, respectively, loss of sons,
danger from fire, peril from enemies, quarrel with the house-
wife, wickedness of the same, poverty, increase of wealth, and
increase of progeny.

120. In cutting timber, one has to avoid trees inhabited
by birds, or broken, withered, scorched, standing near
temples, on cemeteries, milky trece, Zerminalia bellerica,
Azadiracht, and Premna spinosa.!

121. Having presented an oblation, and paid worship at
night, let the carpenter hew the tree in the daytime, from left
to right. It is a lucky token if the tree falls north or east;
coming down in another direction, it is not acceptable.

122, If the cut shows no unnatural phenomena, the timber
will be fit for building material ; if a yellow circle is visible on
it, you may foretell that there isa great lizard within the tree.

' The translation readers the obvieus meaning of the anthor; as to
bis words, they express, in the former half of the couplet, precisely the
Feverse of what is intended; instead of eafTqfaarey it ought to
have been aftqaay व

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 234] =====
232

123, A madder-hued ring on the cut denotes » frog; 6
dark one, a aske; a red one, & chameleon ; a bean-coloured
one, a stone ; a brown one, 8 mouse ; a sword-hued one, water.

124. Let him who desires to prosper sleep not above
grain, cows, persons to bo venerated, fire and deities, nor
in the same straight line with the diagonals, nor with his
head turned northward or westward, nor naked, nor with
wet feet. “

125, Amid the shouts of Brahmans the proprietor has to
make his entrance into his newly-built house, it being strewed
with a great many flowers, adorned with archways, and
decorated with waterpots filled, the gods being worshipped
with inoense, perfumes, and oblations.

 

Onarrer LIV.
On the Exploration of Water-springs.

1. Forthwith I will explain the meritorivus and re-
putable art how to explore springs to obtain water. Even
as there are veins in the human body, s0, too, in the earth,
some of them running higher, others deeper.

2. Although all the water falling from heaven has the :
same colour and taste, yet it becomes different in taste, and
of various colours, owing to the difference of soil.!__ Hence an
examination of it may be based on its analogy with the soil.

8. Indra, Agni, Yama, Niryti, Varuns, Vayu, Soma, and
iva, are to be considered the rulers of the quarters, cast,
south-east, and so on in succession.

4. Eight veins are denominated after the ruler of the
region ; a ninth, in the centre, is called the great vein.
There are hundreds of others, that issue from different
quarters, and are known by their own names.”

" C8, Segrata, 1, p. 169, 1. 9 eqa.

8 "This statement is couched in somewhat byperbolical language;
yet i¢ appears from st. 23 below, that some at least of these veins
were eadewed with clegant names.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 235] =====
233

5. The veins running above the infernal regions, and
those thét are found in the four cardinal pointe, are good;
those that issue from the intermediate points are evil. I
now proceed to describe the tokens of the veins.

6, 7. If you find rotang in a waterless country, there will
be, at a distance of three cubits from thence, and at a depth
of 1$ man’s length,’ « vein flowing from the west. The
(farther) signs are: at a depth of 4 m. L a pale yellow frog,
then yellow clay and a stone protruding from it; beneath there
is water. .

8. Northwards from a roeeapple-tree, at a distance of
three oubits, and a depth of 2 m. 1. under ground, will be an
easterly vein; there (will appear as further indications) clay
of @ emell like iron, then pale yellow clay, and, at 1 m. L
deep, a frog.

9, 10. Where an ant-hill is near a roseapple-tree, there
will be sweet water, 2 m. 1. deep, on the south side. (The
signs are:) a fish at a depth of 4 m. L, and a pigeon-coloured
pebble. There, also, will be dark clay and much water for
a long time. `

11. To the west of a glomerous fig-tree, at three cubits’
distance, and 2} m. lL. under ground, there will be a vein of
good water. (The signs are:) a white snake at a depth of
1 m.L, and a stone resembling collyrium.

-12, 13. If an ant-hill is seen to the north of a Terminalia
Arjuna, there is water in 8 westerly direction, three cubits
from the tree and 84 m.1.deep. (The indications are:) a
great fair-hued lizard at a depth of } m.L; grey clay 1 mL
underground; farther, black, yellow, white clay blended
with sand; at last water, one may predict, in immense
quantity. ^

14, 15. At the above-mentioned number of cubits to the ©
eouth of a Viter Negundo, with an ant-hill annexed, there
will be water, sweet and never drying up, at a depth of 2}
mL A rohit fish at $ m.L, then red-brown clay, farther

* Comm. : TETAS: FONT Qe | sy विंधन्धिकमङु-

Wye (= 5 cubits) way |

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 236] =====
234

pale yellow clay, then sand mixed with gravel (are the in:
dications) ; beneath it is water. ~ ~

16. If an ant-hill appears to the east of a jujube-tree,
one may announce that there is water on the west side,! at
3 m.L A fair house-lisard (being found) at } m. 1. (is a
farther indication).

17. Bhould a jujube-tree, along with a Butea frondosa,
stand to the west, then there is water 3} m. 1. deep, the sign
being a newt at 1 m.L

18. Three cubits more to the south of a spot where a
Bilva and a glomerous fig-tree stand connected, there will be
water at 3 m. L, the indication being a black’frog at 4 m. 1.

19, 20. .If an ant-hill is seen near an oppositifolious fig
tree, there is a water-vein running in the west, at a depth of
83 m.L (The tokens are:) whitish clay and a milk-coloured
stone. At 1} m. L will be perceived a mouse of a colour like
the water-lily.

21, 22. Where in a waterless region a Kampilla-tree is
seen, 8 southern vein rans at three cubits’ distance to the
west, First appears (as an indication) clay of a colour like
blue lotus and like pigeons; at one cubit is a fish with the
amell of a he-goat ; below, is little brackish water.

23. Two cubits more to the north-west of a Bignonis is a `
water-vein, bearing the name of Kumuda, and flowing at
४ 0. 1.

24, If an ant-hill rises near a beleric myrobalan, on the
south side a vein is to be found in the east, at 1} m. L*

25, 26. In case an ant-hill should be perceived west of
the same tree, there will be a vein in the north, a cubit
thence, and at 44 m.1 (The indications are:) a white

" Whenever no distance is specified, it must be understood to be the
same as that mentioned in the preceding stanza.
* Comm. : HUTS STUNT:
विभीतकच्छ याम्यायां वल्मीको यदि इष्ते।

करद्यात्षरोः पूरं सभि च पुष्पे अलम्‌ ॥
Garasvata ts frequently quoted in the Comm. throughout the chapter.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 237] =====
235

scorpion(P) and a saffron-hued stone, at 1 m. 1 In the
westerly direction, aleo, is a vein, which will dry up after
three years.

27, 28. Where an ant-hill, along with sacrificial grass and
indigo,' is stationed north-east of a Bauhinia, there is water,
never drying up, between the troe and the ant-hill, at a depth
of 43 m. LAs signs are to be mentioned: a snake of the
colour of a lotus calix, at 1 m. 1.; red earth, and a coryndon
stone.

29, 30. If an Echites is surrounded by ant-hills, it may be
predicted that to the north of it is water, at 5 m.L; the signs
being, a yellowish-green frog at 3 m. 1., earth like yellow
orpiment, and a stone of the colour of a dark cloud; under
it is a northern vein yielding good water.

31, 32. A frog being seen under any tree shows that
water is to be found at a cubit’s distance, at 44 m.1 At
1 m.1. will be discovered an ichneumon, then dark clay,
farther on yellow, at last white clay, and a stone of the colour
of a frog.

83, 34. In case a snake's abode * appears standing south of
a Karanj-tree, there is a vein in the south at two cubits, at
34 m. 1. depth. At 4 m. 1. isa tortoise; and there will then
be discovered, first, an eastern vein; farther on, a northern
vein with sweet water; beneath lies a yellowish-green stone;
then again water. .

85, 86. An abode of snakes standing north of a Bassia is
an indication that water will be found on the western side of
the tree, five cubits off, at 73m. 1 (The signs are:) first,
a big snake at 1 m.1.; then deep-purple earth, and a stone
of the colour of dolichos, Beneath is an eastern vein, sup-
plying water which is always foamy.

37. Where a smooth ant-hill, combined with sacrificial and
bent grass, stands south of a Tilaka-tree, an eastern vein will
be discovered in a westerly direction at 5 m. 1.

* The Comm. reads Way: fer, and explains accordingly, “a white

ant-hill with sacrificial grass.” 7
* This word and ant-bill are interchangeable terms, -

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 238] =====
236

88, 39. In case an abode of snakes is stationed west of |
a Nauclea, there is water three cubits from it, at 5% m. L
Tt is @ northern vein that flows there, having a smell like
iron, and inexhaustible. (As tokens will be found:) a gold-
tinged frog, at 1 m. 1; and then yellow clay.

40. If either a tal or a cocoa-tree be surrounded by ant-
hills, there is, six cubits further to the west of it, a southern
vein, at 4 m. 1.

41, 42. On perceiving an abode of snakes on the west side
of a wood apple-tree, one may predict that water will be
discovered at seven cubits’ distance, by digging 5 m. 1. deep.
(The signs are): « spotted snake at 1 m.1.; black clay and
a protruding stone; white clay. Underneath rans a vein
from the west; then another from the north.

43, 44. Should a jujube-tree or a snake’s abode appear to
the left (i.e. northwards) of an Acmantaka-tree, water will be
found six cubits distant, in a northerly direction, at 3} m. 1.,
(the indications being) @ tortoise at 1 m.1., 8 grey stone,
clay mingled with sand. ‘The first vein issues from the
southern quarter ; the second, from the north-west.

46, 46. Should an ant-hill rise on the left side (i.e. north-
wards) of a yellow sandal-tree, there will be water three
cubits to the east from thence, &४ 6 ए. 1. (The indications
are): a black snake at 1 m. 1; yellow clay and an emerald-
like stone; then black earth. First there will be found
vein coming from the west; afterwards another from the south.

47. Where, in a waterless region, the characteristics of an
aquatic vegetation, or soft andropogon and bent grass, are
conspicuons, there is water at 1 m. 1.

48. Clerodendron syphonanthus,' Ipomoea, Croton, Sikara-
padt, Lakshman, and double-jeeeamine denote water to be
near, two cubits from thence to the south, at 3 m. 1.

1 A word wTaif, as given in the dictionaries, has no existence but in
corrept manuscripts; the mame of the plant is WTyT. That this
reading of good manescripts Is the only legitimate one is proved by the
fact that the plant Is also called 3YWT, which is, of course, virtually
the same with Bhérngl. `

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 239] =====
237

49. Bushes and frees, growing low, looking smooth and
having their boughs hanging down, have water near them;
whereas hollow, coarse trees, with shattered leaves, lack
water.

50, 51. If Tilaka, Spondias, Crateova, marking nut, Bilva,
ebony, Alangium, Pindara, Sirisa, Anjana, Grewia, Dalbergia,
and Sida appear very sleek, and surrounded by ant-hills,
there is water three cubits from thence to the north, at 44 m. L.

52. Where a plot is grown with grass in the midst of a
grassless plain, or where a grassless spot is conspicuous in
the midst of a soil abounding with grass, a water-vein is
indicated; or one may predict that a treasure will be dis-
covered on the spot.

53. Where trees with thorns and those devoid of them
grow intermixedly, you will discover three cubits further
to the east, by digging 3} m.1., water, or, perchance, a
treasure.

54. Where the soil, being strack by the feet, sounds deep,
there is water, at 34 m. L; the vein issues from the north.

55. If one of the branches of a tree is bent or faded, you
will be sure to obtain water beneath the branch after digging
8०. 1.

56. A treo that shows unnatural symptoms in its fruits and
blossoms points to a vein, three cubits to the east, at 4m. L;
under the surface (will appear) a stone and yellow earth.

57. If a Solanum Jacquini' is seen without thorns and
with white blossoms, one may predict there is water below,
at 33 m. L

58. Where in a waterless country a betelnut-tree showa
two tops, it may be asserted for certain that on the west side
there will be water, at 3 m. 1.

59. In case you see 8 white blossoming Pterospermum or
Butea, there will be water, two cubits to the south, at 3m. 1.

60. Where the ground steams or smokes, there is water
at 2m.1L; and it may be stated that the vein will yield an
abundant supply of water. ॥

' ९००. बष्ठकारिवा निदिग्ध (५. भिरिन्धिवा).

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 240] =====
238

61. Where, on a single spot of a field, the sprouting corn
perishes, or looks thin and exceedingly pale, there is a great
vein at 2 m. 1.

62. Now am I to set forth how a vein is discovered in a
desert country. The water-veins run below the earth’s sur-
face in the guise of camels’ necks (i.e. syphons).

63, 64. If an ant-bill is stationed north-east of a Pilu-
tree, there will be water to the wost; you may hold for
certain that the vein flowing in the north is at the depth of
5m.L The first indication is a frog; then red-brown clay ;
after that yellowish-green clay; at 1 m. 1. lies a stone; there
is certainly water underneath. ति

65, 66. Should the ant-hill stand on the eastern side of the
Pilu-tree, then it may be predicted that in a southerly direo-
tion there is water, at 7 m. 1., at a distance of four cubits and
ahalf. (The signs are:) at 1 m.La enake, half white, half
black, one cubit long. A vein from the south there supplies
plenty of brackish water.

67. From a snake's abode standing to,the north of a Kartl-
tree, one may infer that there is sweet water eouthward, at
10 m. L, the token being a yellow frog at 1 m. L.

68. If to the west of an Andersonis there is an abode of
snakes, you will find, at three cubits more to the south, after
digging 12 m. 1., a western vein of brackish water.

69. An ant-hill being visible to the east of a Terminalia
Arjuna indicates that you will come at a vein at a cubit’s- -
distance to the west, by digging 14 m. 1. (An indication is:)
a great brown lizard at 1 m. 1 -

70, 71. Or, if there be a snake’s abode to the left (é.¢.
north) of any tree denominated after gold, there is water
two cubits from thence in a southern direction, at 15 m. L
The water is brackish. (Tho tokens under the surface are :)
an ichneumon at } m..L, and a copper-coloured stone along
with red earth. The vein is one issuing from the south.

72, 78. Where a jujube-tree and an Andersonia stand con-
joined, whether en ant-hill be near or not, there is water
three cubits further to the west, at 16 m. 1. (Below the eur
face will be discovered :) first, water of good taste, produced

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 241] =====
239

by aeouthern vein; then, a northern vein; at} m. 1 a leaden-
hued stone, white clay, and @ scorpion.

74. Should a jujube-tree appear conjointly with a Karil,
there will bo water in the west, three cubits off, at 18 m. L
1४ 88 a north-eastern vein, rich in water.

75. On the east side of a jujubo combined with a Pilu,
water will be found, never drying, but brackish, at 20 m. L

76. Where a Terminalia Arjuna stands conjointly with a
Karil, or with a Bilva, water will be found two oubits further
off in the west, at 25 m. 1.

77. Should it happen that bent grass and sacrificial grass
on the top of an ant-hill appear of a pale yellow colour, then
sink a well in the middle thereof, for there is water at 21 m. L.

78. Where bent grass, along with Andropogon serratus, is
seen growing on an ant-hill, there is water three cubits
further off to the south, at 25 m. 1.

79, 80. If an Andersonia, conjointly with three other
trees of various kinds, is stationed in the midst of three
ant-hills, there will be water to the north, at an interval of
four cubits sixteen digits, and at a depth of 40 m. 1., where
a stone will be found, under which the vein runs,

81. At a distance of five cubits, in a westerly direction,
from a spot where a knotty Sami-tree is seen, having an
ant-hill on its north side, there will be water at 50 m. L.

82. If the middlemost of five ant-hills stationed at one
place be white, it indicates a vein at 65 m. L.

83. Where a Sami-tree has a Butea near it, water is on
the west side, at 60 m. 1. First (you will discover below the
surface) a snake at } 70. 1. ; afterwards yellow clay mixed
with sand.

84. One cubit eastward of a spot where a white Ander-
eonia is surrounded by an ait-hill, will be water at 70 m. L

85. Where a white Sami shows a great many thorns,
there is water in a southerly direction, at 75 m. 1, while a
snake will come to sight at } m. L

' R. im the text apitecaree as one word, though the Comm.
understands it otherwise. न

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 242] =====
240

86. The existence of water in a woody tract of land may,
not be determined on such indications as apply to a desert
only. The number of m. 1. which has been given in st. 6,
2qq., has to be doubled in the case of a desert.

87, 88, 89. A roseapple-tree and the plants Teori, bow-
string hemp, Ciguméart, Echites, Civa, Qyam, Dioecorea,
Cardiospermum, Garadavega, Sakarika, Glycine and Rici-
nus, growing by a snake’s abode, denote water to be near
the ant-hill, three cubits off to the south, at 3 m. lL The
latter number applies to a watery country, but for & woody
tract the depth is to be fixed at 5 m. 1., and for a desert at
7 m. 1, if the indications be the same. त

90. Where some ground, otherwise uniform and devoid of
grass, trees, ant-hills or shrubs, contains a piece of unusual
appearance, there is water.

91. And where the earth is smooth, low, sandy or re-
sounding, there is water at 4} or 5 m. 1.

92. To the south of smooth trees there will be water at
4m.L The same may bo said, should s tree in tho midst of
a thick wood show uncommon symptoms.

93. Where the eoil slopes downwards, there is water at
14 m. L, in the caso of a woody or watery tract of country.
‘Where insects are frequent, without having their abode in
that place, there, too, is water.

94. An isolated cold spot in a warm ground denotes cold
water; a single warm spot in a cold ground, warm water, ~~
at 3} m. L, and at four cubits’ distance, if a rainbow, fish or
ant-hill be conspicuous. - :

96. If in a row of ant-hills one is prominent above the
rest, there is water beneath it. There is water also, where
the corn in the field withers or does not come up at all.

96, A banyan, » Butea and a glomerous fig-tree standing
conjoined denote water, at 8 m.L The same may be said
from a banyan and Pipal appearing in close connexion.
The vein lies northward.

97. A well being situated in the south-east of a village or
town is likely to occasion constant danger from fire and men.

98. A well in the south-west causes loss of children, and

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 243] =====
241

one in the north-west threatens the wife. Wells in any
other direction are productive of good.

99. Thus much have I composed in dry couplets, with
constant reference to the work, “ Exploration of Water-
springs,” by the Seer Saragvata.—I will now expound the
system of Manu also, in eytta verses.

100. A water-vein will be found in those parts where
trees, shrubs and creepers appear covered with entire leaves
and smooth; where lotus,! Asteracantha, Andropogon, Tri-
chosanthes,. Cyperus, Kaga or sacrificial grass, Nalika or
reed grows.

101, 102. Where betelnut, roseapple, Terminalia Arjuna,
rotang wax, or milky trees, shrubs and creepers, or mush-
rooms, Ricinus, Mesua,* lotus, Nauclea nfpa, Karanj, and
Vitex Negundo; or beleric myrobalan or jessamine ; there
is water at 8m. 1 Where one hill rises upon another, there
also is water at 3 m. 1. at the foot.

103. Where the soil abounds with reod-grass, Kaca and
sacrificial grass, and consists of blue clay mingled with
gravel, or where the clay is black or red, there is much
delicious water.

104. A copper-coloured earth mixed with gravel, yields
water of an astringent taste; red-brown earth, brackish
water; a pale yellow ground is an indication of salt, and s
blue soil of sweet, water. ,

105. Pot-herbs, Vatica robusta, Terminalia Arjuna, Bilva,
Shorea, Gmelina arborea, Ruellia (P), Grislea, and Sissoo are
signs that water is far off; 80, too, are trees, shrubs, and
creepers looking coarse and having hollow leaves.

106. A soil the colour of which resembles that of the
sun, fire, ashes, camels or asses, is said to be waterless. If
the ground be red, and Karil trees exhibit red sprouts and a
milky sap, there is water under a stone.

107. A rock in colour like to lapis lasuli, kidney-beans,

" ९०००. पद्यं WII |
* The rendering is 0०्न५य; 0०००." कृद्ना प्रचिच्ा | CT Yee
wef. writ भागकेसरः। *

Digitized by Google |

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 244] =====
242

clouds, the eyes of a peacock’s tail, or toa nearly ripe fruit
of the glomerous fig-tree, or to a black bee! and collyrium, or
of a reddish-brown hue, has much water near it.

108. A rock showing the colour of pigeons, wax, ghee, or
of a linen cloth, or of the Soma-plant, such a one, aleo, will
soon produce inexhsustible water.

109. A rock exhibiting red and variegated speckles, being
of a pale yellow colour, or tinged like ashes, camel, ass, or
like a bee, Angushtika-blossom,® or like the sun and fire, is
waterless.
. 110. Of good promise are those rocks which show the hue

of moonlight, crystal, pearl, gold; and those which appear
like sapphire, vermilion, antimony ; and those which have
+ the colour of the beams of the rising -sun and yellow orpi-
ment. Thus speaketh the Sage in the next verse :

111. “Indeed, these rocks are extremely hard, boneficial
and always frequented by Yakshas and Nagas. Never will

1 The reading of the Comm., viz. WYTHATAT, may be right, but his
explanstios, BY ATTA | WHT TAT | Is not exact. Bhengtnjene
means “ collyriam used fur bhaxge.” Now, bhenge being nynonymous
with bhengi, and the latter having the sease of “toilet, fashion,” in
French mede, the compoand may be rendered by “ tollet-collyriam.”
Bhaagi distioctly expresses what is called fashion in Eaglish, mede in
French, e.g. in Rija-tar. 7, 922:

क श्रोभादाथिनीर्मङ्कीः प्रावर्तयत मण्डचे।
निर्मत्सरो नरपतिः पुष्पतुंरिव कानने
शुका भिदष्दीवा निष्कलामरयाः पुरा ।

खन्धे महीपालमभवन्निह (०००) रेहिनः ॥

And then: .
पेण राष्योचितो बेव्च राच्चा प्रवर्तितः।
, ५०4
दाचिाव्वानवद्धङ्धिः भरिया तस्व विजाखिनः।
करदाटाुयुखडद्धष्तस्ेन प्रवर्तितः ॥

* Comm: Wyfeat frzufeRe: | The plant is, under this name,
unknown to the dictionaries. “

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 245] =====
243

drought threaten those kings in whose dominions they are
found.” ,

112. When a stone resists splitting, then kindle a fire with
fuel from Butea and ebony. On being made red hot, and
sprinkled with milk and water, the stone will burst.

113. Or boil water with ashes from Mokshaka.! When
the stone, being heated, is seven times sprinkled with this
decoction, joined with potash from reed-grass, it will burst.

114. Butter-milk, sour gruel, spirituous liquor, dolichos,
and jujube fruits mixed together, and left to ferment for a
week, will; by being used in sprinkling, surely make a stone
burst, after it has been heated.

115. Take leaves and bark of Azadiracht; stalke of sesa-
mum; Achyranthes; ebony fruits, and Menospermum. The
potash of all these, liquefied with the stale of cows, being
poured six times over a glowing stone, the stone will
split.

116, 117.—The same as Ch. 50, st. 25, 09.

118. ‘A pond extending in a direction from east to west
retains the water much longer than one running from north
to south, because the latter is more often exposed to rup-
ture by the agency of billows roused by the wind. Let him
who wishes to make such a pond stem the conflux of
water by means of strong timber, or make the dams on
every side from stones and the like, the soil being rendered
hard by trampling of elephants, horses, eto.

119. The banks must be shaded by Zerminalia Arjuna,
banyan, mango, wavy-leaved fig, Nauclea Kadamba, along
with Barringtonia, rose-apple, rotang, Nauclea Nipa, Barleria,
tal, Agoka and Bassia, intermingled with Bakula.

120. On one side let a flood-gate be made, in such a
manner that the passage be built with stones, and let a
pannel without fissures be fixed in a frame, and covered by
grit heaped up against it.

121. (For clearing the water) let a mixture of antimony,
round cyperus grass, Andropogon, powder of Kocdtaka and

Comms, SWAT TW | Wer eye इति प्रथिद्धिः। `

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 246] =====
244

emblic myrobalan, combined with Sfrychnos potatorum, be.
pat into a well.

122. If the water is muddy, sharp, salt, bad of taste or
not pleasant of odour, it will by this mixture become clear,
tasteful, very nice of smell, and possessed of other good
qualities.

123, The asterisms which are propitious when commencing
the sinking of wells, are Hasta, Magha, Avurdha, Pushya,
DhanishthA, Uttara-Phalgunt, U.-Ashigha, U.-Bhadrapodd,
Rohint and Catabhishaj.

124. He (for whom a well is made) having made an obla-
tion to Varuna, has, first, to cause a plug of banyan wood or
rotang to-be put into the soil at the place of the vein, while
he honours it with flowers, perfames, and incenses.

125, I have formerly, after studying the opinions of
Baladeva and others, set forth how rain-water is got after
fall-moon’s day of Jyaishths. The manner how to find
spring-water has, secondly, been told by me, Vardba-Mihirs,
in this chapter, thanks to the Sages! -

 

Cuarrszr LV.
Culture of Trees.

1. Considering that water reservoirs without shade on the
margin are not lovely, one ought to have gardens laid out on
the banks of the water. ,

9. A soft soil is favourable to all sorts of trees. Let one
thereon sow sesamum, which must be reaped when in bloom.
This is the first work to prepare the ground.

8. Then plant in the garden or by the house, in the first
place, auspicious trees, as Arishta, Agoks, Rottleria, Sirts,
and Priyangu-trees.

4, 6, Bread-fruit, Agoka, plantain, rose-apple, Lakucha,
pomegranate, grape, Pilivata, citron, and Gaertnera racemosa,
are trees that, on being smeared with cow-dung, should be

* Ch. 23, 1, ०९१.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 247] =====
245

planted By slips, or carefully grafted on the root-stump or
stem (of a different tree).!

6. Trees having no branches yet, must be transplanted
in the dewy season; those that have their branches developed,
in winter-time; and those that are possessed with goodly
stems, in the rainy season, care being taken that they are
stationed in the particular direction suiting them severally.

7. Let trees, when being transplanted, be smeared all
over the stem down to the root with ghee, root of Andro-
pogon, oil wax, worm-seed, milk, and cow-dung.

8. The planter, duly purified, has to pay honour to the
tree. with washing and unguents before planting it. The tree,
once set, will show the same foliage as it had before.

9. When the trees have been planted, they noed to be
watered morning and evening in summer ;? during the day
in the cold season, and whenever the soil is dry during the
rains. .

10, 11. Rose-apple, rotang, Vanira-rotang,? Nauclea, glom-
erous fig, Zerminalia Arjuna, citron, grape, Lakucha, pome-
granate, Dalbergia, Karanj, Tilake, bread-fruit, Timira, and
Spondias, are the sixteen trees, which, according to generally
received opinion, require a moist ground.

12. The greatest space to be left between two trees is twenty
cubits; the middling, sixteen ; and the smallest, twelve.

13. Trees which, by growing too near one another, touch
each other, and get their roots intermingled, are hindered,
and do not yield fruit properly.

" ००००. अन्धवुषद्यं मूलच्छेदं छला तसच्छितमूखस्योपरि विया
तीयो वुषो रोपलीयः। अथवा खन्वाधादन्ववुषं छित्वा त्व खन्बमु-
त्कीयं विजातीयो वुधो रोपशोयः। तच मृत्तिकाव दापयेदिति ॥

2 The reading Waa is preferable to Wayat, because the latter
does not occer, for aught we know, but ia the sense of “ ead of summer ™;
yet, etymologically, it might as well sigaify “ withia sammer-time.”

* Yetasa and vlaira clearly denote two varieties of rotang; the
Indian lexicographers know nethiag about the difference; for the dis-
tinction of plants they are net to be trasted, at least the edited works of
Amara, ete.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 248] =====
246

, 14. By the agency of cold, wind, or heat, diseases are en-
gendered,—either faded colour of foliage, stinted growth of
shoots, searness of branches, or flowing out of sap.

15. To heal the trees, firet trim them with a knife, then
smear them with worm-seed, ghee, and mud, and sprinkle
them with milk and water.

16. In case a tree loses its power of bearing fruit, a
sprinkling with a refrigerated decoction of milk, mixed with
Dolichoe, pease, beans, sesamum, and barley, will be con-
ducive to a revival of the growth of fruits and blossoms.

17, 18. To promote the growth of the fruits and blossoms
of trees, creepers, shrubs and plants, at all times, sprinkle `
them with a mixture of two ddhakas* of dung from sheep and
goats in the form of powder, with one ddiaka of seseamum
seeds, one prastha of flour, one drona of water, and one tulé
of cow’s-flesh, the whole to be infused during a week.

19, 20. Let a seed be steeped in milk, then (when being
taken out) hatidled with a hand greased with ghee; more-
over, let it be repeatedly rubbed with cow-dung, and suffumi-

' gated with flesh of hog and deer ; thereupon, with an addition
of fish-blubber and hog’s-suet, let it be planted in a prepared
soil, after ten days? Being sprinkled with milk and water,
it will grow and bloom.

‘Comm. : तथाच काञ्चपः
तिक्ै्मोपिर्येमुैः कुलत्वैः सखषापितं पयः।
Wits Sat qerat फलपुष्याभिवृ्ये ॥

® Aa ddhaka == 64 pales; 0 prastha = 16 pales s adrope == 236 pales. -
5 More accurately, as to the general purport, the Comm. : {Sl Wl-

चिदूचष्छ बीजं दथवासराशि दथ दिनानि, दुग्धभावितं चीरेण सिक्त
काम्‌ WE । ज्ययुतहय्योजितं अआञ्ययुतेन ुताग्यकेन करेथ
संयोजितं ची रमध्ये चिप पुनयुंहीला घुताभ्जक्िन करे पिकीभूतं पुथद्धा-
Se Ut प्व्बहं कं कार्थ यावद शदिनाभि। ततो गोमयेन मोक्ता
बङश्नो बद्न्वारान्विरूषितं मर्दितं । कोडः सुकरः । मृगो हरिखः।
Wrearifafgtaiayfit areca yaaa । ततो मासिना-
निषेव सूकरवाखथा वाराहमस्मया समन्वितं समायु परिकर्मिता-

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 249] =====
247

21. Even a tamarind produces a sprout when sprinkled
with a cémpound of ground rice, pease, and sesamum, with
flour and stale flesh, and afterwards repeatedly suffumigated
with turmeric.

22, For making the wood-apple shoot, they use a combi-
nation of eight roots, vis. the root of Echites,! emblic
myrobalan, Grislea, Gendarussa, thick-leaved rotang, and
Sdryavallt,* Syam-lata and Dalbergia.

23. The recipe is this: let the wood-apple seed remain
during a hundred pulsations® in milk that has been boiled,
mixed with the before-mentioned compound of eight roots,
and afterwards wholly refrigerated; dry the seed every day
in the sun’s rays; repeat this for a month, and then plant it.

24. Dig a round pit, a cubit in diameter and twice as deep,
fill it with such water as is deeoribed above ; wait until the pit
is dry and have it parched ;* then smear it with honey and
ghee, along with ashes.

25. Fill it up again with ground pease, sesamam, barley,
and clay; add to it an infusion from a mixture of water with
fish and flesh; pound all this until it becomes a thick mass.

26. Plant the sced at a depth of four digits, and sprinkle
it with an infusion of water blended with fish and flesh.
Soon will a tendril with nice sprouts cover the porch in an
astonishing way.

27, 28, Any seed, being steeped a hundred times in a
paste of Alangium-fruit, or in’its oil, or (the dregs and oil
of) Cordia, will, when planted in clay, impregnated with
hail-water, sprout instantaneously, and what wonder, that
the branches should be loaded with fruits P

ामवनौ रोपितम्‌। परिकर्मिता तिखवापनेन (४० st.2). The reading
‘ta for ATA has been noticed in the vv. rr.

" ००००. आआसहोटः शारिवा. ‘

* ‘The plant séryavallf is not explained by Utpela: SITAT HEART |
केचित्‌ चिवुदितीष्छन्ति।

3 ‘The reading is ९००९५; एकन, ४०० ताज्ाश्रतन्‌+ ००4 वमु
ताला (*1. तालो) इष्वश्ब्दः। ve

+ (णण, सुष्कमप्रिना प्रद्हित्‌, +

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 250] =====
248

29, 80. (When you wish to plant) Cordia seeds, take the
precaution of stripping them of the shell and of steeping
them, in the shade, seven times in water mixed with a
thick sauce from Alangium-fruits; then rub them with
buffalos’ dung, and lay them in manure. Boing afterwards
planted in clay soaked with huil-water, they will produce
fruit (80 to say) in a day.

31. The asterisms declared by the Seers of transcendental
wiedom to be favourable to the planting of trees are the
Fixed asterisms (i.¢. the three Uttards and Rohin!), the Mild
asterisms (i.e. Anurddbd, Citra, Mrgaciras, and Revatt),
Mala, Vicdkhé, Tishya, Cravaps, Acvint, and Hasta.

OHAPTER LVI.
Description of various Temples.

1, Having made great water reservoirs and laid out
gardens, let one build a temple, to heighten one’s reputation
and merit.

2. Let’ him who wishes to enter the worlds that are
reached by meritorious deeds of piety and charity,' build a

° | 1 The definitions of ietéptrte all agree in the mala point. Utpela
quotes some of them:

Ue यश्ादिकं पूतं वापीकूपतडाकादिकम्‌ ।
BUTT THT

We aay wert mit Tifa |.
इष्टाभिः पनुबन्वेख चातु सर्यजेष्ठिजः 8
अप्मिष्टोमादिभिर्यशैयों यजेत ख इवान्‌ |
जापीकूयतडाकादि रेवतायतणानि च ॥
अ्रपरदानमारामाः पर्तमिद्ममिधीयते ।
तथाच काश्यपः

इष्ापू्तीदिभिर्यशैयायत्‌ कुर्वन्ति मानवाः ।
अपिष्टोमादिपमुभिरिषटं चशचः प्रकीर्तितम्‌ ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 251] =====
249

temple to the gods; by doing which, he shows both (piety and
charitj). .

3. The gods use to haunt those spots which by nature or
artifice are furnished with water and pleasure-gardens.

4, 5, 6, 7,8. Lakes where groups of lotuses like umbrellas
ward off the sun’s darting beams, and the waters receive
socess of brightness by the rows! of white water-lilies pushed
aside by the shoulders of swans; where swans, ducks,
curlews and paddybirds utter their resounding notes, and
fishes repose in the shade of Nioulas on the brinks; places
where rivers flow, having curlews for their tinkling sone,
singing ewans for their melodious voice, the watersheet for
their cover, and carps for their belt; regions where streams
have blooming trees on the margin, comparable to ear
ornaments, confluences not unlike to buttocks, sandy banks
like to high-swelling bosoms, and merry laughter from the
swans; tracts of land in the neighbourhood of woods, rivers,
rocks and cataracts; towne, with pleasure-gardens: it is `
such grounds the gods at all times take delight in.

वापीक्ूपतडाकादि पूर्तेमायतनानिष ।
ख्ेख्ठितिं खदा कुयात्‌ तदा तपूर्तखञ्ितम्‌ ॥

The word yajne in the first stanza of Kic. is taken in its general
sense of “act of religion”; in the same manner are “study” and
“ hospitality,” two of the yafaas, 1. religious daties, In Vedic language
इष्टापूर्त means “ merit owing to deods af piety,” and “ reward of plety ”
It nearly colncides with the later acceptation, and exactly corresponds to
क्म, “ ploes merit,” and “ reward of pious deeds,” e.g. Ath. V. 2, 12,4:

दष्टापूर्तेमवतु नः पिवृषान्‌
“The religious merits of the Manes may protect us.” Bat R.V. 10, 14, 8:

खं गच्छस्व पितुभिः खं यमेनेष्टापूर्तेन परमे व्योमन्‌
“Meet with the Manes, with Yama, with the reward of plous deeds in
the highest beaven.” The sense of “satisfaction of wishes,” attributed
to the Vedic iehtpérta in the Dictionary of B. and R., is based epoa
& wrong etymology, and Is discountenanced by all the passages where
Itoccurs. There is no doubt that in deriving ishfé from yej, the Indians
are right; a decisive passage Is Ath. V. 7, 103.
" ४० बीच, ० the Comm. bas it, for wt.

 

11111. Ka ee
oogle

Digitized by

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 252] =====
250

9. The several sorts of soil which we indicated, when
treating of house-building, as suited to Brahmans, eto., are
likewise recommended to persons of the different clasece,
when they wish to erect temples.

10. Let the area of a temple always be divided into sixty-
four squares, while it is highly commendable to place the
middle door in one of the four cardinal points.

11. The height of any temple must bo twice its own width,
and the flight of steps equal to a third part of the whole
height (of the edifice).

12, The adytum measures half the extent (of the whole), |
and has its separate walls all around. Its door is } of the
adytum in breadth and twice as high.

13. The side-frame of the door has a breadth of } of the
altitude; likewise the threshold ; the thickness of both door-
posts is commonly stated to be equal to } of the breadth.

14. A door with three, five, seven, or nine-fold side frames
is much approved. At the lower end, as far as the fourth
part of the altitude of the doorpost, should be stationed the
* statues of the two doorkeepers.

15, Let the remaining part be ornamented with (sculp-
tured) birds of good augury, Crivrksha-figures, crosses, jars,
couples, foliage, tendrils, and goblins.

. _ 16. The idol, along with the seat (i.e. pedestal), ought to

have a height equal to that of the door, diminished by }, of _
which two-thirds are appropriated to the image, and one-
third to the seat.

17, 18, 19. Meru, Mandara, Kaildse, Vimane-figure, `
Nandana, Samudga, Padma, Garuda, Nandin, Vardhana,
Kunjara, Guhardja, Vysha, Hansa, Sarvatobhadra, Ghata,
Sinha, Rotunds, Quadrangle, Octangle, and Sixteen-angle,—
these are the names of the twenty kinds of shrines. I now
proceed to describe their characteristics, following the order
in which they have been enumerated.

20. The Meru is sexangular, has twelve stories, variegated
windows,' and four entrances. It is 32 cubits wide.

* Comm. BUC अम्बकारववाचाः

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 253] =====
261

21. The Mandara is 30 cubits in extent, has ten stories
- and turrets.'—The KuilAsa, too, has turrets, and eight stories;
it measures 28 cubits.

22. The Vimana is 21 cubits in extent, and has latticed
windows."—The Nandana has six stories and sixteen cupolas;
it measures 32 cubits.

23. The Samudga (i.e. round box) is round. The Padma
(i.e. lotus) has the shape of lotus, measures 8 cubits, has
one spire, and only one s‘ory.?

24, The Garuda and Nandin show the form of the sun-
eagle, are 24 cubits wide, must be constructed with seven
‘stories, and adorned with twenty cupolas.

25. The Kunjara (i.e. elephant) has a figure like an
elephant’s back, and is 16 cubits long, and broad at the
bottom. The Guharaja likewise measures 16 cubits, Both
have a roof with three dormer windows.>

26. The Vysha (i.e. bull) has « single story and one turret,
is everywhere round, and measures 12 cubits. The Hansa
has the form of a swan; and the Ghata, being shaped like a
water-jer, has an extension of 8 cubite.*

* Comm. WATS STAG:
eee: fart: weedy fers: |
feuwerte foeltd: wrargy -a faritee: a
® A coplous description of diverse Viminas or pyramidal shrines is to
be found in Rim Réz, Arch., p. 51, sqq.; and p. 48.
5 It most be understood that the signs of a Padma apply alse to a
Samudga, barring the shape.
The same Is more clearly expressed by Kicyapa:
WAR मरडाकारः पथपुष्छयिमूषितः।
जब्दी तदाषछतिशैयः पणादिरहितः पुणः ॥
कराया षुतुष्का विली उत्नमूमिकौ ।.
दथमिर्धिरुधेरछीमषितौ कारयेत्तु तौ 8
५ प्र# (०००. [वण चक्श्राला ण बद्धसारिका ("1 OWT
रिका) ॥ ४447979 the word 15 ०००० 95 =: ० ०. चद श्चा.
© To a Hansa belong the same qualications as to the Vrsha, except-

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 254] =====
252

27. The Sarvatobhadra has four entrances, many summits,
many beautiful dormer windows, and five stories, its extent
being 25 cubits. ॥

28. The Sinba is a building with twelve angles, and is
covered by lions; it is 8 cubits wide. The four remaining
(vis. Rotunda, Quadrangle, Octangle, and Sixteen-angle)
are dark (in the interior). The Quadrangle has five cupolas
(whereas the reet have one only).!

29, 80. A story’s altitude is of 108 digits, according to
Maya, bat Vigvakarman pronounces it to be of 3 cubits and
a half (i.e. 84 digits). As to this, however, able architects
have declared that (in reality) there is no discrepancy of |
opinion, for, if you add the height of the crown-work,® the
smaller number will equal (the greater).

ing the form. A Ghata differs from the former in other respects, but
bas the same samber of stories and turrets.

* ‘The statement in Eicyapa is much more explicit :

सिंहः सिंहैः खमाक्रान्ः कोयीदादश्ि वतः।
विष्कमादषृहखः स्ारेका तस्यच भूमिका ॥
get वु्ञाछठतिः कार्यः सन्छातुखाखवापरे ।
खान्धकारास्ु सवे ते भूमि$ेकसमायुताः ॥
एकाष्डमूषिताः सये पथमितुरम्कः।

° ८००, ०269: च बहरा रात्विश्च प्राखादख् वाममाभेनागत्व
पुरतः प्राखादच्च दारं कार्यम्‌ । तच मजिमयी मतिमा । तत्वाक्या तथ
WarergerTe® a

* The word kapotaplliké, properly “dove-ridge, dove-list,” may be
veadered by crown-work, fillet, gable-edge, and even by cornice. In
Tamil kapotakem \s explained as being “a moulding in masonry”; see
Wiaslew’s Tam. Dict., i.v. Rim Réz, Arch., p. 24, says: “A kapotam
fa a section of moulding made in the form of a pigeou’s head. It Is a
crewalag member of cornices, pedestals, and entablatures. When em-

ployed in tho latter, it often connects utility with beauty, inasmach as
the beak of the bird is 20 placed as to serve the purpose of a spout.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 255] =====
253

81. Herewith are the characteristics of temples described
in compendjous form; it contains (in the main) the whole
treatise composed by Garga on it. Of the voluminous works
by Manu, eto., have I, in writing this chapter, only taken
notice in as much as I remembered.

Cuarrer LVII.
On Diamond- Plaster.

1, 2, 3. Unripe ebony fruits, unripe wood-apples, blossoms
of silk cotton, seeds of Boswellia, bark of Dhanvan, and
acorus; combined with these substances, boil a drone of
water, and, when the mass has sunk to an eighth of the
volume, take the sediment, which combine with the following
substances: turpentine, myrrh, bdelliom, marking nat, resin
of Boswellia,' and of Shorea, linseed, and Bilva-fruit. The
paste, being mixed with these, is termed Diamond-plaster.
‘The same author notices (p. 51) that “the spout may be made to spring
from the head of a lion, etc.” With this, ef. Utpala’s definition :

कपोतपाजिकागरहयेन बहिनिर्गतानि सिंहमुखानि काराखुश्यन्ते । ००२
alse Vicvak. 6, 707:

rare’ frdelt wrGt कपोतौ गर्ममानतः। ˆ

wd figerarna watt 9 wees

wortrenhnae sand meee |

end mendrtie वेदीवन्धो भवेदिह ॥
Neither kapetapliké, nor its synonym elfenka, bave the meaning of
“ dovecot,” as Colebrooke renders them in his Amara-Kosha, They
never occur in that sense, and cannot by any means have such a mean-
ing, oa account of their etymology. Vifanke is exactly the English
“fillet,” in its different acceptations; it denetes mere generally also
gable-edge, battlement. Colebrooke’s error, strange to say, has been
perpetuated in all dictionaries; the more reason now to draw attestion
to it.
} Utpala defines kundurs te be the resia of Doodar, QeqTqywfe-
We * .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 256] =====
264

4. This plaster, calefied, is to be applied on the roofs! of
temples and mansions, on Civa-embloms, idols, walls and
wells, to last for a thousand, a million of years. `

5, 6. Lac, resin of Boswellia (or of Deodar), bdellium,
Grhadhfima,® wood-apple, Bilva-kernels, fruits of Uraria, of
ebony, of Madana, seed of Bassia, madder, resin of Shorea,
myrrh and myrobalan ; from these is extracted a second sort
of Diamond-plastor, having the same quulitics with the
former, and to be used for the same purposes.

7. Another plaster termed Quasi-diamond? is prepared
from horn of cows, buffaloes, and goats, apes’-hair, buffalo-
hide, and cow-hide, combined with Azadiracht, wood-apple;
and myrrh. :

8. A.mixture of eight portions of lead, two portions of
bell-metal, and one portion of iron-rust is mentioned by
Maya, and known by the name of Diamond-compound.

 

Cuartzer LVIII.
Description of Idols.

1. The smallest particle of dust becoming visible whore
the sun shines through a lattice is to be considered an atom.
In fact, this is the first of all measures.

2. An atom, a particle of dust, a tail-hair’s end, a nit, a
louse, a barleycorn, and a digit, are, successively, eight times _

+ ८०००. कलमी वातायनम्‌ । ०५८९७०४०० ia general means “any
place whither one goes to take an airing ;” sometimes “a window” is
intended by It, other times the flat * roof” of an Indian house. In the
latter acceptation it Is here used by Utpala, and frequently elsewhere,
eg. Kathtsarit-otg. 95, 18, स्लनुहोकुङ्गवातायनागताः; 103, 169,
इर्म्यवातायनारूडः, ०५८.

- 9 Comm. FEYR WATT YR Wyaty nfaw:

* The comparative suffix tare here denotes a resembiance, or may be
expressed by “almost, somewhat, quasi”; as im ecvefare, a male,
properly “quasi-horse.” The same interchange of siguifcations is
found in préyes, properly “ more,” Greek WAciov, and then “ resem-
bling, almest.”—The Comm. exhibits the form vajretela.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 257] =====
255

larger than, the preceding messure.! One digit is also the
module. .

3. One-third of the altitude of the door of a temple, di-
minished by one-eighth, is the measure for the seat of the
image; the idol iteelf is twice as high.

4. The face (of a atatue) is twelve of its own digits* long
and broad. Nagnajit, however, notes a length of fourteen
digits, which is s measure for Dravidas (barbarians).*

5. The nose, forchead, chin, and neck are four digits (i.e.
modules) long; likewise the ears; the jaws two digits long
and broad. The chin is two digits broad. ,

1 The Comm. quotes a parallel passage, the former stanza of which
recars Is Mana, vill. 132, whereas the lntter wholly differs :

ware
जालान्तरगते भागौ यत्सु YAR CT |
प्रथमं तत्‌ प्रमाणानां चस्रेणुं प्रवते ॥
तखाद्रजः कचा लिचा यूका यवो ऽकरुखम्‌ ।
ऋमादषएटमुणं खेयं जिनसदहयाङ्केः शमः ॥
From an ankuown author are the — quoted by BapG-Deva ia his
edition of the Siddhanta-Cir. p. 52:
Weare: ufaty ar -करेष्वाणोकते यद्रजः
ख प्रोषठः परमाणुरष्गुखिति शिरे रेपुर्मवेत्‌ ।
तैवालाग्रमथाष्टमिः कथमुखेर्लीवा च युका्टमिः
सख्वाचिभिख् तदष्केन च यवो -ढाभिख तैरङ्कलम्‌ |

2 Digit bas here no 90१००५९, 0०४ + relative value; it is the modale
and equal to J, of the whole beight of the idol, or 1, of idol and seat \

४४००. ००००. चस्ात्काात्पाषायादिकाद्रा प्रतिमा कवते तदं |
चौटप्रमायविवभितं दादथमामविभकते छलवा त्को मागो नवधा ` |
wre: 1 wi yeast भवति । चद्यादषटाधिकमङ्ुलश्तं प्रतिमाः |
ware wea! i

* (मण). तथाच नखजित्‌ /

विखोर्थ दादथ मुखं दयेव च चतुरदंप ।
अङंलानि तथा कार्ये त्मानं द्ररविरं सुतम्‌ ॥ ५
ae
~ \ \ ‘
. . ५ » \ wy ~
Digitized by Googl

an)

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 258] =====
266

6. The forehead is eight d. in breadth. ‘Two d. further २
off are the temples, being of four d. The ears are two d.
broad.

7. The upper margin of the ear should be made in the eame
straight line with the brows, and at 4} d. distant (from the
latter). The car-bole and tho prominent part! near it lies in
the same line with the extreme eye corner.

8. Vasishtha puts the space between the extreme eye
corners and eyes at four d. The under lip measures one
digit, and the upper lip one half,

9. The dimple above the lip is half a digit. The mouth.
must be made four d. in extent and one d. and a half in
thickness; an opened mouth is of three d. in the middle.

10. The nostrils extend two d.; at the end of the nostrils
rises the nove, two d. high. The intervening space between
the eyes is of four d.

11. The hole of the eye measures two d.; the eyes as
many; the ball is equal to § of the eye’s measure, and the
vision * of the pupil is equal to one-fifth of the ball. The
aperture of the eyo is one digit.

12. The brows, from one extremity to the other, have an
extent of ten d.; the thickness of the line representing tho
brows is half a digit. The interstice botween-tho brows is
of two d., so that a single brow is four d. in extent,

13. The streak of hair should be made equal (in extent). _
to the brows conjoined, and half ad. thick. At the end of

* Comm. Taare कर्णग्रोतःसमीप खद्नतभागः। जे

a At the further corner is the juncture, as It were, of two
eyelids; hence the term netraprabandhe: similarly the same is called
sendhi in Sacrata, il. p. 303,

* Comm. YATCTAAAAM BAT. This te right if wo take

kumérl or kanfnikd in the sense of the pepil’s innermost part; cf.

Secruta, fl. p. 303:
Wenwaygur i
छष्वात्‌ सकप्रममिष्न्ति दृटिं इृिविधारदाः ॥ `

It mast be takea late account that the vision in the pupil requires a
larger measere in sculpture than in natare.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 259] =====
257

the eyes must be delineated the inner corner,! one d. in
extent. `

14. The head is thirty-two d. in circamference, and four-
teen in extent (i.e. apparent width). In a picture, however,
only twelve of them are visible, twenty not visible.

15. The face and the hair, put together, make up sixteen
d. in length, as Nagnajit states it. The neck has a width of
ten, a circumference of twenty-one digits.

16. From the neck down to the heart it is twelve d.; from
the heart to the navel, as many; the same interval is pre-
ecribed to be kept from the centre of the navel down to the
penis.

17. The upper legs measure twenty-four digits; the lower
legs likewise; the insteps* four d., and the feet equally so
(in height).

18. The feet are twelve d. long, and six broad; the great
toes are three d. in length, and five in circumference; the
second toe is three d. long. न.

19, The remaining toes should be less by one-eighth, in
succession. The prescribed elevation of the great toe is 1} d.

20. The (measure of the) nail of the great toe is by the
experts set down at 7 d.; that of the other toes at 4d, ora
little lessened for each succeeding toe.

21. The cirouit of the leg at the extremity is stated to be
of fourteen, and the breadth of five d ; but in the middle
part the width is seven, and the circumference twenty-one.

22. The knees are, in the middle, eight d. in thickness,
and twenty-four in circumference. The upper legs are, in
their middlo part, fourteen d. thick, their cirouit being double.

28. The hip is eighteen d. broad and forty-four in circuit.
The navel is one d. in depth and in extent.

24. The circumference of the middle, at the height of the
navel, is of forty-two digits. The space between the two

' The inner corner, keravireke, is alse called méshiké in a quotation
from Kicyape.

* जागुकपिते (८) ये WS चद्धणिके इति NAAT | This cekkalixam
or cakkelikd looks like > एकर form of the diminntive of cakre,“ dise.”

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 260] =====
258

paps is sixteen. The armpits are six d. higher up (in an
oblique direction) than the paps.

25. The shoulders should be made eight d. broad. The
arms, as well as the fore-arms, measure twelve (in length),
the arms being six d. broad, and the fore-arms four.
< 26. The arms measure, at the upper end, sixteen, and at

the wrist twelve digits. The palm is six broad and seven
long.
27. The middle finger is five d.; the fore-finger is half a
joint smaller; the ring-finger is equal to the fore-finger and
the little finger less by a whole joint.

28. The thamb must have two joints, while the other
fingers have three. The measure of a nail is equal to half a
joint of the fingors respectively. .

29. An image should be represented in such a way that its
equipment, dress, ornaments, and outward form be in agree-
ment with the country. By possessing the required character-
istics an idol will, by its very presence, bestow prosperity.

30. Rama, the eon of Dacaratha, and Bali, the eon of
Virocana, are a hundred and twenty digits (in height); the
others, according to their being of the greatest, middling, or
emallest size, measure 108, 96, or 84, reapectively.

81. Our Lord Vishnu may be represented either with eight
arms, with four, or with two arms, his breast being marked
by the Qrivatsa-figure and adorned with the Kaustubba gem.

82. He is darkish as lin blossom, clad in a yellow garment,
shows a serene face, wears earrings and a topped crowa,' and `
‘has the neck, chest, shoulders, and arms thick.

83. In his right hands he bears a sword, a club, and an
arrow, while with the fourth hand he bestows his blessings.*
Tn his left hands is a bow, a buckler, a discus, and a conch.®

* The word kirffa is a seml-Prikyt form of a word that has been lost
in Bkr., but survives in the Latia criste. Similarly the Ske. jethare
bas arlern out of jestera, Greek yaorrp,

8 Wtferg: Fe in the text 15 a misprint for eye.

०५०००. कार्मुकं धनुः प्ाङ्खम्‌ । खेटकं फरः। चज सुरर्धंनम्‌ । धङ्खच `
पावनः । ,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 261] =====
~ 3 269

84. 11 कूण prefer to make Vishgu four-armed, let one hand
be represented as if he were in the act of bestowing his
blessing, and the other holding a club; this for the right
side; in the left hands is the conch and the disous.

35. Of a two-armed image the right hand is (represented
as) giving a blessing, and the left as holding a conch. In
this manner let the idol of Vishnu be framed by those who
are desirous of happiness.

36. Baladeva must be made having a plough in his hand,
with eyea lively from drink, and wearing a single earring.
His complexion is fair like a conch shell, the moon, or lotus
fibre.

87. The goddess EkAnanc&! should be made betwixt Bala-
deva and Krshna, with the left hand resting on her hip, and
with the other holding®* a lotus.

38. If it is intended to make her four-armed, then let her
hold a lotus and a book in her left hands, while, on the right,
she confers a boon on the supplicants with one hand and
holds a rosary in tho other.

89. The left hands of an eight-armed EkAnanc& should
contain a drinking pot, a bow, a lotus, and a book; the right
arms a gift, an arrow, a mirror, and a rosary.

40. Samba is figured with a club in his hand; Pradyumna -

as handsome, and holding a bow. Both are accompanied ~

by their wives, bearing a buckler and a sword.

41. Brahman (tho Creator) has four faces, a drinking pot
in his hand, and is seated on a lotus. Skanda looks boy-like,
holds a javelin, and has a peacock for ensign.

42. Indra has a white, four-tusked elephant, in his hand
the thunderbolt, and, besides, another characteristic, viz. a
third eye placed horizontally on his forehead.

43. CQiva has 6 crescent on his head, a bull for ensign, and

१ Bkdnasch is one of the forms of Durgt in ber quality of Hecate;
ef, Kathisarit-8. 53, 171.

* The ungrammatical partic. udvahat! is used without any necessity,
as the author might bave availed himself of the 3rd pers. udvehati. All
2088. however, agree. te

19

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 262] =====
260

a third eye high on his brow; in one hand the trident, and
in the other the bow Pindka. Or, also, his left part may
consist of the half-part of Parvatt.

44. The Buddha ought to be represented seated upon a
lotus, and looking as if he were the father of mankind, with —
hands and feet marked by lotuses, with a placid countenance,
and very short hair.

45. The god of the Jainas is figured naked, young, hand-
some, with a calm countenance, and arms reaching down to
the knees; his breast is marked with the Crivatea figure.

46. The Sun ought to be made with elevated nose, fore-
head, lower leg, thigh, check and breast, and clad in the -
dress of the Northerners, 80 as to be covered from the feet
upwards to the bosom.

47. He holda two lotuses growing out of his hands, wears
a diadem and « necklace hanging down, has his face adorned
with earrings, and a girdle* round his waist

48, The Sun when made with & body protected by a
coralet, a complexion fair, like the ipterior of the white
water-lily, a smiling and placid face, and a light crown
brilliant through the gems, bestows bliss upon the maker.

49. A statue (of him) one cubit high is beneficial ; one
that measures two cubits in altitude brings wealth; an
image of three cubits promotes peace; and one of four,
abundance.

50. An idol (of the Sun) with excessive limbs bodes peril
from the monarch ; one with undersized limbs, infirmity to
the maker; one with a thin belly, danger of famine; one
that is lean, loss of wealth.

51, When it shows a wound, you may predict the maker’s
death by the sword. By being bent to the left, it destroys
his wife; by being bent to the right, life,

* 52. It causes blindness by having its eyes turned upwards,
and care, by the eyes being downcast. These good and evil

1 Another r. bas sunfle, “very dark”; a third, sunfte, “ well trimmed.”
® Read Few, and see Dict. of B. and R. 1. ए, The word Is taken
from the Bactrian elwytonhe.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 263] =====
261

tokens, as told in respect to the Sun’s statue, apply to all
idols.

53. (For the construction of an emblem of Civa), set out
in the length the (measure of the) circumference! of the
round part, and divide the whole phallus into three portions,
of which the part at the bottom must be quadrangular, that
in the midst octangular, and the reet round.

64. Sink the quadrangular portion into a pit in the earth,
and put the middle member into the cavity of the. pedestal.
The pedestal is visible upwards to its cavity, in all directions,
over an extent equal to its height.*

55. A phallus being excessively lean and long, destroys
the country; one which has lost its side, tends to the ruin of
the town ; one damaged at the top is pernicious.

56. The host of divine Mothers have to be made with the
characteristics corresponding to those of the gods whose
names they bear.’ Revanta is figured mounted on horse-
back, with Chase, Sport, etc., for his attendants.

57. Yama holds a club, and is seated on a buffalo. Varuna

1 Le. the length of a stone slab, plece of wood, ete., destined to serve
for the phallus, should be made equal te the ciroumference of the upper
part.

* This is awkwardly expressed; Comm. UTEW WATS | UTTMATS
युत्तभागद्ड श्यं तावत्प्रमाशं खमन्ततः पीटिकायुषुलं कार्यमिति ॥
Utpala is wrong in taking YRYGETY 10९ 9 compound, but as the
round portion and the middle part have the same altitude, the resalts
remain the same. fiyqgagy is a mispriat for fufiqrar.

०८०००५.५ ब्रह्मणो यशदं ब्रह्मा कमण्डलुकरचतुर्मखः पडवासनचेति
ब्रह्माणः कार्यम्‌ । कायों “मुवो भगवानिति बेवष्यव्ाः। शोः भिर
सीभ्डुककेति रोद्याः । न्द्‌; कुमारूप इति कुमायाः । शुकचतु-
्विषायो दिपो मदेन बन्रपाणिलमिेणराः । दणष्डी चमो महिष
इति चाम्याथाः। हंसाखूडख्च पाशमृददय इति वारदब्छाः । जरवाहम्ः
कवेर इति कीवेयीः । एवमन्धासां नारसिंहीवाराहोविनायकीनामः-
qwrt) fey mat enter wer feratge sitet
Ga waite oftere hr ares cfs

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 264] =====
262

is mounted on a swan, and bears a noose. Kubora is carried
by men, wears a crown bent to the left, and has a big belly.
(58. The chief of the Goblins is represented with an
elephant’s face with one tusk, a prominent belly, bearing a
hatchet, and having in his hand a turnip of very dark foliage
and root.)!
° ००००.; चुके तत्वर्षं वायम्‌ अनुक लोकतो इष्वा का्सिति॥
लवाय काक्षः.
Wee गजमुखखतुबाडर्विनायकः।
WAST: YUH नेचच्यविभूषितः ॥
ब्रह्मा चतुमुंखो दण्डी ठष्याजिनकमण्डली ।
विष्युखतुर्मुः शाङ्यङ्गवक्रगदाधरः ॥
ज्रीवत्साङ्कः पीतवासा वनमालाविभूषितः।
जरि स्युलदेहो रोमावर्तविभूषितः ॥
छद्वारितमुखः सम्यो बटिकानिःबहञचुजः।
वाराहः सुकरुखखतुवाडविमूषितः ॥
. गीलाल्लनचयप्रष्लो च्यानासक्नः सुलोचनः ।
रचरो वटिलख्थो वुषयन्राकेमूषयः ॥
खरमेद्धोपवीती च छर्तिवासाः पिनाकधृत्‌ ।
अद्छिकाष्टादथमुवा सर्वप्रहरयान्विता ॥
शशा सिंहरथा धन्धा महिषामुरसूदनी ।
मधूरवाहनः खन्दः शक्िदुद्कुरधारकः ॥ --
शुख्ूपदेष्ो विक्रान्तो देवखेनापतिः धिगुः।
आदित्वणदणः समवो कवचो खद्धुष्तथा ॥
निबखी पडकजकरः षटतु 0) किरोटवान्‌।
रेराव्खतुदं शः चेतरन्तो महागजः ॥
WATERY ALY VATS महागलः ।
fardeereraet 8 तुतीयं तद्ध कारयेत्‌ ॥
Pewter अवी तस समीपया ।
we हेवगशाः सवे खा युधामरयोण्डवलाः।
wher Wyere ger: prewar: t
For Wgy: we have perbaps to read Wray: “with prominent jaws.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 265] =====
Cuaprer LIX.
Solemn ingress into the forest.

1. The solemn ingress into the forest ought to take place
on a day propitious to the maker, calculated by the astrologer
and boding luck, when, morover, the auguries are favourable
for setting out.

2, 3, 4. Trees growing on cemeteries, roads, temple pre-
cincts, ant-hills, public gardens, hermitages, sacred spots,
near river confluences, or such trees as require being watered
from jars, or such as are stinted, hurt by younger or up-
springing trees and creepers, or injured by lightning and
wind, or fallen spontaneously, damaged by elephants, sear,
parched by fire, or inhabited by bees,—all such have to be
avoided; whereas those with sleek leaves, blossoms, and fruits,
insure good luck. On going to the tree selected, let one pay
worship to it with an oblation and flowers.

5. Propitious to Brahmans are Deodar, sandal-tree, Sami
and Bassis. Soap-berry, Ptpal, Khayir, and Bilva-tree pro:
mote the prosperity of Kshatriyas.

6. Terminalia tomentosa, Khayir, Seduari and Dalbergia
promise well to Vaigyas; and ebony, Rottleria, Zerminatia
tomentosa, Terminalia Arjuna, mango and Shorea, to Cidras.

7. Mark the quarters on the tree, as well as its upper and
lower end, since 4 phallus or an idol ought to be thus placed
that its sides are turned to the same directions.

8. Let due honour be paid to the tree with milk porridge,
sweetmeats, boiled rice, curds, sesasum seeds, partially
squeezed out,' spouted cakes," and such like, along with
spirituous liquors, flowers, incense, and perfumes.

In the night do worship to the gode, Manes, imps,
1 Comm.
* Urpala gives no definition of ullepiké, which at any rate is a sort
of sweetmest; uliup means “to bedrop, to apout,” net as the Dict. of
B. and R. 1. v, bas it, “to pick op, to take-out.”

| Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 266] =====
264
giants, serpents, demons, goblins, urchins,' eto., and, in
touching the tree, say

10, “Thou art destined to serve for the idol of such and
sacha god. Hail to thee, O troe! accept our worship fittingly.”

11. “ May those beings who are living here, on receiving
our tribute of honour paid in due form, take up their abode
elsewhere! May they now excuse us! Reverence be to
them !"”

12. The next morning, having sprinkled the tree with
water, begin to cut it on its north-eastern side with an axe
smeared with honey and ghee, and proceed cutting in such a
way as to keep the tree always to your right.

18. If the tree comes down to the east, north-east, or
north, it brings good speed; its coming down to the south-
east, south, and so forth, will have for results, respectively,
burning by fire, famine, famine, sickness, loss of horses.

14. The omens observed at the cutting and falling down,
as well as the tokens seen in the interior of the timber-wood,
which are not mentioned in this chapter, have previously
been indicated by me in the chapters on Indra’s banner and
on house-building. Those have to be taken into account on
this cocasion also.

Onarren LX.
Setting up of Statues.

1. Let a skilled man construct in the north * or east a shed
for the inauguration ceremony, with four archways, and
covered with sprouts from auspicious trees.

2. For the east side of the shed are prescribed variegated
wreaths and streamers; for the south-east side, red ones; for
the south and south-west, black ones.

3. They must be white in the west, pale yellow in the

» 0० विनायका firwi:, fc. vesiag spirits, or in German
धि es

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 267] =====
265

north-west, variegated on the north side, and yellow in the
north-east.

4, An idol, being of wood or clay, promises long life, for-
tune, strength, and victory ; one of precious stone, tends to the
weal of the people at large; a golden one yields prosperity.

6. One of silver bestows renown ; one of copper, increase
of progeny. A statue or phallus of stone insures a great
acquirement of ground.

6. An image being hurt by a pin kills a person of
eminence and the family; one being damaged with a pit,
produces diseases and endless calamities.

7. After smearing (with cow-dung) a plot of ground within
the shed, and strewing it with sand, then, with sacrificial
grass, lay the head, pillow, and feet of the statue on a throne.

8, 9, 10. Let the image, with the head to the east, be
bathed with an infusion of wavy-lcaved fig, Pipal, glomerous
fig, Sirts, and banyan, mixed with all sorts of auspiciously
named plants, with sacrificial and other grass, with clay dug
up by elephants and bulls from mountains, ant-hills, oon-
fluences, river banks, and lotus-grown lakes, joined to water
from holy bathing-places and the five products of cows,! the
whole combined with scents and water containing gold and
jewels. Let the bathing be performed amid the sounds of
varivus musical instruments, solemn shouts, and the recital of
holy texts. .

11. Eminent Brahmans have to mutter prayers addressed
to Indra, in the east; prayers to Agni, in the south-east ;
for doing which they ought to be honourably rewarded.

12, Let the special priest make an offering also to Fire,
with prayers addressed to the god whose idol is being con-
sccrated. The symptoms of the fire have been indicated by
me in treating of the raising of Indra’s banner. |

13. A fire wholly shrouded with smoke, turned to the left
and casting sparks at every instant, is not auspicious. The
reciting priest’s failing in his memory or stepping forward is
pronounced to be unpropitious.

1 Vis., cow’s stale, dang, milk, cdrds, and ghee.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 268] =====
266

14. When the statue has been bathed, clad in a new
garment, smartly adorned and honoured with flowers and
perfumes, let the person, whose function it is to set it up, put
it on a nicely-spread bed.

15. After the sleeping idol has been consecrated with
wakes, dancing, and song, they have to proceed to its setting
up at a period indicated by the astrologer.

16. Tet the image, worshipped with flowers, unguents,
amid the sounds of horns and musical instruments, be led,
with all precaution, round the shrine, in such a manner that
the latter is always kept on the right side.!

17. Thereupon, make a copious oblation to treat Brahmans
and fashionable people, and, after a piece of gold has been
deposited in the cavity of the seat, let the image be placed
upon the base.

18. By particularly honouring the setter-up, astrologer,
Brahmans, fashionable people, and carpenter, one shal] in-
herit good things in this world, and heaven in the next.

19. The priests of Vishnu are generally styled Bhagavatas;
those of the Sun, Magi; of (iva, Ash-smeared priests ;*
those of the divine Mothers, are termed Adepts in the rites
of the Mothers’ circle; those of Brahman, Priests; the
followers of the all-benevolent Saint (i.e. the Buddha) are
known as Cakyas; those of the Jinas, as Naked Monks.
These different priests have to perform, agreeably to the rule
peculiar to each sect, the ceremony in honour of the god of
whom they are the devotees.

20, 21. The raising of idols is favourable when the sun is
in his northern course, the moon during the bright half of
the month being stationed in a sign, half-sign, ete., of
Jupiter’s domain, an immovable sign and immovable® ninth-

* Comm, WANT STRAT MTEC मासादख TTY
waza ।

* Comm. UNUM: |

> ९०००. बुषकु्थोरग्बतमे । तथान्धद्धिश्मिधुनककटकन्धातुलाघन्बि-
जीनानानन्दतमे ख्िरणवां कोद |

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 269] =====
267

part being on the horizon, the benevolent planets standing in
the fifth, ninth, first, fourth, seventh, or tenth House, and the
malign in the Houses of Increase (i.e. third, sixth, tenth, and
eleventh), whilst the lunar asterism of the date may be some
of the fixed or mild ones,' Cravana, Tishya or Svati, on a fit
day of the week, Tuesday excepted.

22. Here have I given in succinct form a general descrip-
tion of a ceremony that tends to the woal of everybody, but
in the work of Savitra’s, the inauguration and setting up are
treated separately.

 

Cuarrern LXI.
Signs of Cows.

1. Henceforth I give « brief account of the knowledge
of the good and evil signs of cows which Pardgara of yore
communicated to Brhadratha. As a general rule, all cows
are of good omen; yet I will enumerate the divers charac-
teristics in conformity to authoritative lore.

2. Kine with dripping, filthy, coarse, or mouse-like eyes
bring no good; nor those that have wavering, flat horns, are
dark red or of the colour of donkeys.

3. 4. Cows with ten, seven, or four teeth, with drooping
hornless head, depressed back, short thick neck, a middle
shaped like a barleycorn, split hoofs, a blackish excessively
long tongue, very slender or very big ankles, too large hump,
lean body, and having too few or superfluous limbs, are held
in bad esteem. `

5. A bull, too, exhibiting the same characteristics, brings
no luck; nor does one that has too big and excessively hang-
ing testicles, a breast wholly covered with veins, cheeks
covered with thick veins, and one that arines in three diverg-
ing jets.

6. A’bull of russet or dark red colour, with cat’s eyes,
brings no good, though he has value for a Brahman. An

" 0००. छन्राचितयं रोदि Ver yerfee | aafirc heey.
राधा रेवती च मुदूनि। ^
20

८

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 270] =====
268

animal with black lips, palate, and tongue, and continually
Wowing, is pernicious to the flock.

7. A bull that has the colour of a black antelope, has
a white belly, makes too much dung, is possessed with a
gross gland and huge horns, must be parted with, although
he be home-bred ; if not, he will bring ruin upon the flock.

8. A bull being partly ashy, partly red of colour, with dark
spots on his members and cat's eyes, brings no luck, not even
to Brahmans, should they accept such a one.

9. Bullocks that being put to the carriage move on in a
manner as if they drew their feet out of the mud, and have
a elender neck, timid eyes, and a depressed back, are not fit
for carrying loads.

10, 11, 12. But such as have soft yet compact red lips, _
emall buttocks, a red palate and tongue, small, short and
erected ears, well-shaped belly and straight legs, somewhat
red and compact hoofs, a broad chest, a great hump, a sleeky,
soft and thin skin and hair, red and slender horns, a thin tail
reaching to the ground, red eye-corners, a long breath,
shoulders like a lion’s, a thin and small dewlap,—such are
esteemed as being good runners,

18. Bullocks! showing hair-crinkles which are turned to the
left on the left side, and others running to the right on the
right side, and having legs like those of a roe, bring good luck.

14, Such as have eyes hued like the beryl-stone, or sur-
rounded by a white circle,* or formed like a water-bubble,

1 Ie need scarcely be pointed out that the nomin. case enoguAah, is
uagrammatical.

* Come. CYTE ASTRA CY Te wafer
ख मकिकाचः । तथाच प्रालिहोषः
शुकराजिपरि चिति थ्यागर्बोचने मुभे ।
महिकाचो महाधन्ः स इयः छनष्यतारकः।
‘The correspeading passage of Paricara, however, has:
मुुसंहततासौषटाख्गुषिद्धाखगुकिवः।
विरू्यमधरवर्थेच

रहखिर्धेख नयनिखवा रहनडनी निवि; ।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 271] =====
vf

269

and exhibit thick eyelids and unsplit ankles, are highly
valued, and all of them fit for carrying loads.

15. A bullock having a wrinkled snout, a cat-like face,
being white on the right side, or else resembling in colour the
red water-lily, dark lotus, or lac, and furnished with a nice
tail, is equal to a horse in speed. .

16, An animal with a ecrotum hanging low, a sheep’s
belly, squat groins and breast, is certainly fit for burden and
travel, equal to a horse in speed, and conducive of good
results.

17. A white one with russet eyes, or with red horns and
eyes, with a large mouth, is termed a “‘swan,”! and declared
to promise good luck, and to be the increaser of the flock. ध

18, A motley one with a tail touching the soil, with
reddish groins, red eyes, and a big hump, will soon render
his owner the possessor of Fortune.

19. Others also, of any colour, but having one leg white,
bode good. Where one with absolutely auspicious signs is
not procurable, another of partially good promise is so-
ceptable. .

Oxnarrern LXII.

Signs of Dogs.

1. A dog that has three feet furnished with five nails,
but the right fore-foot with six, whose lips and muzzle are
red, that has a lion’s gait, and smells the ground in going,
the tail being shaggy, the look like a bear’s, the ears hang-
ing and soft,—such « dog being kept in # house promises ere
long great luck to him by whom he is fed,

2. A bitch with five nails on each foot, but six on the
left fore-foot, with eyes ‘surrounded by a white circle, with
crooked tail, and having a brown colour and hanging ears,
protects the domain of the feeder.

* Ina slonflar case we should use the term ‘‘phanix.” When a learned
man is called peremehense, it may be rendered by “a great phanix.”
In fact, both Aenea and ‘phenix’ were symbolical names of the Sgn.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 272] =====
2702 VIL 3 ^

Osarren LXIII.
Signs of Cocks.

1, A white cock with straight wings and talons, with red
face, nails, and crest, and crowing sonorously at the end of
night, brings weal to the king, his subjects, and horses.

2. A cock with « barleycorn-shaped neck, or of the hue
of « ripe jujube fruit,’ or big-headed, or glittering with
many colours, is much prized for fighting, whereas one of the
hue of honey or bees insures victory. Any cock differing
from such ss described, with a weak and small voice, or
halting, is not esteemed,

3, A hen with soft and pleasant voice, with sleek body,
bright face and eyes, likewise promises to kings fortune,
renown, triumph and success.

Onarren LXIV.
Signs of Tortoises.

1. A tortoise being hued like crystal or silver, variegated
with dark streaks, with a body round as a pot, and with a
nice backbone, or having a rosy body speckled with dots like
white mustard seeds, promotes, when kept in the house, the
grandeur of any prince.

2. A tartle dark-hued like collyrium or bees, variegated
with dots, perfect in limbs and body, or one with a thick
neck and « head like a snake's, equally tends to the weal of
realms. ॥

8. A tortoise shining like beryl-stone, with a thick neck,
& triangular shape, a nice backbone, and well-concealed
cavities, is likewise of good augury. Let kings, for the sake
of auspiciousness, keep the animal in an artificial pond, or in
a basin supplied with water.

* Comm, ्यबसदृद्सीवः। यवधिरा शोके प्रवि इति। थो वा बद्‌-
दखडदो खोहितवरथंः सुपक्कवदरफलाम दवर्धः।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 273] =====
91*\/॥. &।

Cuartzen LXV.
Signs of Goats.

1. I will tell the lucky and evil signs of gosts. Such as
have eight, nine, or ten teeth, are lucky, and may be kept; .
such as have seven teeth, should be removed.

.  @ A black circle on the right side of a white goat isa
favourable mark. Likewise a white circle on the right side
of one having the colour of an elk, of sable hue, or red.!

8, The udderlike part hanging down from the neck of
goats is known by the name of “neck ornament.”* A
goat with one dewlap brings happiness; extremely lucky are
those having two or three dewlaps.

‘4, All goats without horns, and those that are entirely
white or entirely black, promise good. Lucky also are such
as are half black, half white; or half russet, half black.

5. A goat that marches in front of the flock, and the
first that plunges into water,—that has the head white, or
blazes? on the forehead,—is favourable.‘

" Or “dark red.”

* Anglice dewlap or wen. Mani Is taken in the sense of Latin
monile, Norse men, Old Saxon meni; it Is well kaown that the same
acceptation is very common in Vedic writings.

* Utpala reads kyttikd instead of fikkiké, explaining it by tilakéh.
The word krttikd, evidently in the acceptation of “ blaze, star, white
dot,” occars also in the Crautasitra of Kityfyana 20, 1, 34, where
kyttikéayi is interpreted by the commentator Ia this way: WTWST
wecfire we wand Wragrfg. The man understood the general
parport, but was evidently anacqusiated with the techuical meaning of
Ayttikd, . ग

© A goat of this description Is termed kuftake; see below, st. 9.

31

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 274] =====
272

6. One that has the neck or head speckled, the colour of
pounded sceamum, and the eyes red, is esteemed of good
sugury. ‘Likewise a white one with black legs, or « black
one with white legs.’

7. A white goat with black testicles and a black patch in
the middle, or one whose step is resounding and slow, is

(ह

auspicious:

8. ‘A goat with horns and feet like an elk’s, or white in
the forepart and black behind, promises good.’ About this
matter there is a stanza of Garga’s, running as follows:

9. (“The various kinds of goats denominated) Kuttaka,
Kutils (or Kuttika), Jatila and Vamans, are all four children
to Fortune, that do not dwell in places from whence she has
fled.”

10. Inauspicious are such goats as have « voice like a
donkey, a: wretched tail, misshapen claws, s bad. colour,
stunted ears, an clephant’s head, or a black palate and

tongue.

, 11. Such as have « colour and dewlap of favourable ap-
pearance, are hornless and red-eyed, will, when properly
attended to in the dwellings of men, yield pleasure, renown,
and fortuna,

 

Cuartzn LXVI. ` „ ---
Signs of Horses.

1, A courser will be perfect in all its limbs, when the neck

is long, the prominences above the eyes‘ extensive, the ramp

* Sach goats ge by the name of kufile.
2 An animal of this description is called jefile. ,
® The term for it is ofmana.
4 In a quotation, not unlikely from Paricara, we find « definition of
( ।
भेदे तथोपरि शाता तयोः प्रच्छादनं ततः ।
खम्बन्वरं दितं छष्वं हृडिमष्छवमिव च ॥ `

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 275] =====
278

* and heart broad, the palate, lips and tongue red, the skin,
hair and tail fine, the hoofs well formed, the pace and face
good, the ears, lips and tail short, the legs, knoes and thighs
round, the teeth equal and white, the shape and appearance
nice. Such a horse kept by the king will always tend to the
destruction of the foe.

2. (Turnings in the hair) under the eyes, on the jaws,
cheeks, heart, throat, nose, temple, hip, abdomen, knee,
scrotum, navel, shoulder, or breech, and on the left (or
“ right”) loin or leg, are ill-omened.'

3. Turnings of hair on the mussle, throat, ears, back,
eyes, lips, haunches, forelegs, loins, flanks, along with those
on the brow, are of very good augury.*

4. Amongst them there is one “constant turning” on
the musszle, one in the hairs of the forehead, two on the

, कनीनिके चान्तःकोये तथापाङ्गौ च बाह्यतः ।
बद्मोपरि च पाकि अधिके तथोपरि ॥

* In a work on borsecraft, ascribed te Katya Vararucl, and cited at

large by Utpala, we read the following: _
शङ्धूयष्डगाखाहगुकरिककुदक्रोडकच्ासनख-
्न्ादव्वागुवूर्थन्नवणमखनुदपोषयुच्छभुपाति ।
स्ूरासिणद्धीकखाड) चिकवुषणवहस्छन्धनानृदवाति-
रा््तिरेवभेतैरगुभफवकरिर््वनोयास्तुरङ्गाः ॥ ‘

The term WY@UT Is defined in another quotation (probably from

Parfcara):

खन्धस्त चोपरि गरीवा तस्वाश्ोपरि केखरम्‌। .

जतो wyatt: Steg: TET: a
, अखने पुषटञच पुटव॑शस्ठतः परम्‌ ।
. * 0००. तच्चाच वरद्चिः ।
युद्धिप्रपादासुवहाप्रकष्ठकिधाग्तववःअवदोपरण् ।
निगार 4 warz@h थे रोमंजाखे जिथमावदश्ि ॥

८

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 276] =====
274

groins, two on the adjoining parts,! two on the heed, and
two on the breast. `

&. A colt is marked by six white teeth, which become
tawny when the horee is two years old; at three years it
loses, and (at four years) recovers its middlemost incisors ;
at five (and six) years the eyetecth. The same teoth will
after every subsequent period of three years become darkish,
yellow, white, coloured like black salt, wax, conch-shell,
become hollow, slack, and at length fall out.*

 

Cuarren LXVII.
Bigns of Elephants.

1, Elephants with tusks of the colour of honey, with
well-proportionéd body, being neither too fat nor too lean,
ft for use, with even members, a back curved like s bow,
and buttocks like those of a boar, are denominated Bhadra
(ie. well-favoured). .

2. The characteristics of the species called Manda (i.e.
dull) are: a slack breast, slack folds on the waist, a paunch-
belly, a thick ekin and neck, « huge loin and root of the tail,
and the look of a lion. -

* ए५५; कुकिनाभिमण्यमामे रण्धद्ञानं । तत उपरिमाने VAT
wart | Uwe नि

कुचिनाम्बन्तरे रग्रमुपरन्भं तथोपरि ।
1am unacquainted with the English terms. ,

2 The corresponding passage from Paricara bes: ZY WATWAT: |
अपाव CT WTS WS Te | alee AY aha | CTT CTT
Safes s

» Comm: HUTS TCU:

wage मध्यमक द््नयुबमघः rere Tart
शत हवष्दे कवायं पतितसमुदितं चिदतुःपशकेषु ।
feat wre Gfire merafee FRR wwe वहलानाम्‌ ॥

\

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 277] =====
275

3. The elephants of the species Myga (i.e. deer) have the
lip, tail and penis short, the feet, neck, tusks, trank and ears
_ small, the eyes large. The sort called Sanktrpa (i.e. mixed)

shows the characteristics of those before described inter-
mingled.

4. The height of the Mrga is five cubits, the length
seven, the circumference eight. These numbers increased
by one are those of the Manda; by two, of the Bhadrs.
The “ mixed” elephant has no fixed measure.

5. The-colour of the Bhadra’s frontal juice is green; of
the Manda’s, turmerio hued; of the Myga’s, sable; of the
mixed elephant’s, mixed.

6, 7. Auspicious are such elephants as have the lips,
palate and mouth red; the eyes like a sparrow’s; the tusks
smooth and turned up at the extremity; the face broad and
long; the backbone arched, long, not protrading, and lying
deep; the frontal globes like a tortoise’s back, and covered
with thin and scanty hairs; the ears, jaws, navel, front and
genitals big; the claws convex, to the number of eighteen
or twenty; the trank round and covered with three. lines;
the hairs of the tail nice; the frontal juice, and the wind
from the trunk’s point, of good odour.

8. Elephants with a long finger’ and a red point of the
trunk, with a voice like the din of rainclouds, and with a
big, long and round neck, bring luck to the king.

9. But elephants devoid of frontal juice; having too
many or too few claws and limbs; crooked, undersized, with
tusks similar to ram’s horns; with prominent testicles
lacking the extremity of the trunk; having the palate
dusky, dark-blue, spotted or black; with small tusks or no
tuske at all; or without, sex; those, as well as a female
elephant that shows some characteristics of the male, and
one that is pregnant, should the king order to be re-
moved to another place, as they produce very dire conse-
quences. “

> ९०००. बलानां करग्ान्ते मांपेशङुकतन्दवाच्चः। करपराग्यं ख-
` कलं पुष्करमुच्छते ॥ |.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 278] =====
276

Onarren LXVIII.
Signs of Men.

1. By duly observing the height, weight, gait, compact-
" nese, temperament, colours, sleckness, voice, natural character,
physiognomy, division of limbe,' and complexion, the skilled
soothsayer may reveal the past and the future.

9. Feet not sweaty, hued like the calix of « lotus, warm,
curved like « tortoise’s beck, with soft solee, connected toes,
bright and red nails, well-shaped heels and no projecting `
ancles, are those of a monarch.’

& Feet shaped like « winnowing basket, rough, with
whitish nails, crooked, covered with veins, mesgre, with
toes standing far from each other, bring poverty and pain.
Feet elevated in the middle are fit for travelling ; tawny ones
lead to the extirpation of the lineage; feet with soles of the
hue of burnt clay cause Brahman murder; yollow ones go to

forbidden ground.*

88. Any limb being coarse, lean and covered with veins,

१ 0८ ००. ४ 94-96.

* Comm.: AWTS UX: ,
पादैः Tate: मुखिधैः दिष्टिः सुधोमनेः। -
खद्नतिः सेद्रहितैः Frenette पार्थिवः ॥

ware wa:
पद्मरोत्पलनिभिष्ठणा ereatAe: |
yer पादतजेरतेया धे चाज सुखमाभिनः ॥
. ° 0०००. तथाच समुद्रः .

मूपाकरिष्ठणा पेरवः गुष्वेः सिराततिः ।
खसः पाष्डुरे खूवेखरविर तिडुःखिताः ॥
उल्यूढावध्वर्भिरतौ कायौ कुना |
ब्रह्म्नो पक्कमुदावतिपीतावनम्बमौ ॥

‘The translation from st. 4-83 Is here omitted, as it affords very little

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 279] =====
’

7 |
is pronounced ill-favoured; in the contrary case entirely

auspicious.

84. Three parts of a king's body should be broad; three ~
others deep; six lofty ; four short; seven red; five long and
fine.

85. Navel, voice and character—these three should men
have deep. Breast, forehead and face—these three being
broad is a happy sign in men.

86. The six members (which should be) lofty are breast,
girdle, nails, nose, face, and raised part of the neck. The
four limbs that bestow benefits by being short, are penis,
back, neck and legs.

87. The outer corner of the eye, feet, hands, palate, lips,
tongue and nails—these seven, to be sure, bring happiness
by being red. Five parts, vis. teeth, finger-joints, hair, skin
- and nails, being fine,! are proper to happy people. `

88. Jaws, eyes, arms, nose and the space between the paps
—these five will not be long in men, unless they be kings.*-

Interest, and as some stanzas are couched in @ language too free to
be decent in an English garb. It may be noticed that the sigas of
beauty, ‘such as described in this chapter, generally agree with the
32 lakehapas and 80 enuvycnjenas of the ideal image of Buddha;
og. sunigighagulphe in st. 3 corresponds with gighaguiphe in Lalita-
vistara 122, 17; ruciratémranekha in the same stanza aad st. 41 with
ttmrenakhe of Cikya; and so forth. “Cf, Burnouf, Lotus de la bonne.
Tol, 583, 9qq. Any distinction between lekehepe and annzyenjens ie
unknown to our author.

* In the text read GURTFY, of course.

® Utpala quotes from Garga:

चतुद ्मदण्दखतुःकुष्यखतुःखमः ।

SAU दश्नुंखिसुकः Was we 8

पादौ बुर्फौ स्वौ पाञ्च वुषशौ वचुवी खनौ । =, -
स्छन्बोौ वंचलौ अदे इतौ बाङवकौ तथा ॥

चतुद थलमदनद्ं मद्धो नृषु अंखति ।

अचितरि धुवौ ध्मस् के्ाैवासिताः शुभाः ॥

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 280] =====
278

On Complezion. .
89. Let those who are able to predict the fature from
the marks on the body, observe the complexion of men,
quadrupeds and birds, as it announces lucky and unlucky
consequences. For it is like the shining of a lamp within a
orystal jar, revealing the qualities of the inward light to the

outside.

90, A complexion that originates in the element of earth

खङुषो इदयं जेषे दशना खमा UTA!
अलारः सव्यशस्यन्ते सदे चर्यमुखावहाः ४
विडो ताशुराखष् मुखं नेजे खनौ गणाः ।
,' इतौ पादौ च अनि पद्माभा दध देहिनाम्‌ ॥
पािपादसखरपरीवा वृषौ हदयं शिरः ।
wareqet ye que: gfe Ewe
BR ताराविरदहिते दशना सिताः शुभाः।
` एतच चदं ठत्लं नराणां समुदाहइतम्‌ ॥
Wega: TILA: TYMAT: |
wecafenfretdferaite: mre a
` बाद जेषानरे चापि et geet we!
खनयोर्रपैव पथदीर्धः प्रच्स्यते ॥
सजीवा प्रजननं ओद इखि BP च पूजिते ।
चेतरेषु सर्वेषु सर्वमेव परञखडते 8
दन्ता रोमि च च्छविः।
लवा नखा सवव प्सू प्रभते ॥
कथाचिवचथांसि तथा मुखं पुषं छकारिका ।
wigity fefge: wg: wees
wrferaral wet wre सुखं भेषे खनौ नखाः।
We Cathe werwlgast तमादिशेत्‌ ॥
wel Fe ward च चिविोर्य प्रभरखयते ।
wet ace नामी च चिगीर परञ्रखते 8

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 281] =====
‘

279

manifests itself in the sleekness of teeth, skin, nails, hairs
on the body and the head,’ and is connected with a sweet
emell. It causes contentment, acquisition of wealth, bliss
and daily progress in virtue.

91. A complexion due to the element of water is smooth,
white or clear yellow, and delightful to the eye. It gives
affection, meekness, pleasure and bliss. Like a mother it
causes that wants get fulfilled, and grants to mortals its bene-
ficial effects.

92. The“ fiery” complexion is harsh and fierce, showing
like red lotus, gold or fire. Allied with energy, valour and
ardour, it leads men to victory, and effects that the object
aimed at is soon attained.

93. A complexion derived from the element of wind will .
be amutty, coarse, black and of bad odour; it engenders
death, captivity, sickness, misery and loss wealth, A
complexion arising from the aerial element shows
crystal, ‘is bright, very noble, allied with good fortune, and
@ treasury, #0 to say, of felicity.

94, The complexions enumerated are the eover-
ally, of earth, water, fire, wind and sky. Some teach that
’ there are ten of them, to wit (besides the foregoing),
derived from the Sun, Vishnu, Indra, Yams, and the Moon,
successively. In their characteristics and effects, however,
they are, to state it briefly, equal to the others.

On Voice.

95. Kings have voices resembling the sound of an elephant,
bull, host of chariots, battle-drum, tabor, lion or thunder.
A voice like a donkey’s, or broken and harsh, is proper to
men deprived of wealth and enjoyments.

On_ Temperament.

96. There are seven constituents of temperament: fat,
marrow, skin, bone, sperm, blood, and flesh. The effects of

+ ४०० नेन्न शावा.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 282] =====
280
the different temperaments of men may be stated, in short,
as follows:

97. Those in whose temperament blood is the prevailing
element have the palate, lips, gums, tongue, outer eye-
corners, anus, hands and feet red, and are blessed with many
enjoyments, wives, goods and sons. =~

98. Persons with a smooth akin are rich men; those who
have the skin soft, will be beloved ; intelligent men have it
thin. Those in whom marrow or fat prevails, are possessed
of s handsome form, and rich in sons and goods.

99. A man in whom the bones predominate, has thick
bones, is strong, an accomplished scholar and good-looking.
Men with much and heavy sperm are happy husbands,
learned and handsome.

100. One in whose constitution flesh plays the foremost
part, is corpulent, learned, wealthy and comely. The being
well knit of the joints is called compactness. It is a cha-
racteristic of a man enjoying a good fortune.

101. Five parts ought to show a sleeky appearance, viz.
mouth, tongue, teeth, eyes and nails. They are sleek with
men rich in sons, wealth and popularity; rough. with the
poor.

On Colour.

102. A bright, sleek colour is proper to kings; the same,
but in inferior degree, marks persons possessing sons and”
wealth ; a coarse colour is proper to indigent people.

. On Physiognomy.

108. The peculiar character implied by one’s physiogno-
mical appearance, must be studied from the countenance.
-Thoee who have a face like a bull, tiger, lion or sun-eagle,
are endowed with irresistible valour, and monarchs conquer-
ing foes. „ `

104. Men with countenances like a monkey, buffalo, boar
or buck, are owners of sons, riches and happiness. Persons
marked by faces and forms resembling those of asses and
camels have neither wealth nor enjoyment.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 283] =====
281
“ On Height
105. The number of digits which make the of

men’s height is, for the tallest, 108; for those of middle
height, 96; for the shortest, 84. `
On Weight.

106. A man living in happy circumstances weighs half a
bhdra (=1000 palas); an unbappy man lees than that. One
bhdra is the weight of very- well to do people; one and
a half, that of monarchs.

107. A female has her full weight and height at twenty
years of age, but a male at twenty-five years, or else in the
fourth period of life.! .

On Natural Character.

108. Man is born with a character that is congenial to
earth, water, fire, wind, aether, gods, men, giants, imps or
beasts, The marks are the following :

109. A man of the nature proper to earth has the odour
of fragrant flowers, is liberal in sharing with his fellow-
creatures, of sweet breath, and constant. One of a watery
genius is in the habit of drinking much water, fond of
women, and relishes liquids,

110. A man of the nature of fire is fickle, very keen,
cruel, hungry and gluttonous. One of the nature proper to
wind is restless, lean, and soon swayed by anger.

* The words of the text are clear in themselves, but convey no dis-
inet meaning. The Comm. says: Steere qAe-Me Ar मानो-

worries where? y aifee frfat aydera Cg Bot -

how can it be said that any person may grow in height after his fortieth
year? It may be sapposed that the author had only in view the
weight. As to the interpretation of the commentator, it is wholly
wrong s the four periods are Saya (Infancy), Bratt (boyhood), whyy
(Prime of age), and the fourth GOW वादक. 7४० यौवव ००६०९३०४
with the juvenilis eetas of the Romans, and extends to the forticth
year; cf. Sucrata, 1. 199, ~.

eee Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 284] =====
282

111. One of setherial nature is ingenious, has an open |
face, is skilled in the knowledge of sounds, and po!
his body. A man who has the genius of gods

placable and affectionate. ,

112. A person of the genius of mortals delights in son;
and finery, and is always ready to share with his fellow- ` *
creatures.

118. One endowed with the character of giants is irascible,
knavish, and wicked. One who is congenerous with imps
will be fickle, dirty, talkative and very plump of body.

114. One that is timid, greedy and voracious, you may
take to be a man of bestial character. Such is the different ~
nature of men which by the soothsayers is called “the

Bi.

\

poor fellows is swift and skipping.

116. A carriage when tired ; a meal when hungry ; drink
when vexed by thirst; a guard when in danger—the man .
who can command these things in time is called fortunate,
indeed, by those akilled in telling a man’s character and
fatare from the marks on his person. --

117. Herewith have I, with (due) attention to the opinions
of the Sages,’ succinctly expounded the signs of men. Ho
who studies it will become esteemed by the king and a
favourite with everybody.

1 That fs, in other words: “myself am not responsible for any
Statement.” Appeallag to the Sages is usual with our author whenever
he wishes to disbarden himeelf from responsibility. Utpala falls mot to -
make a similar observation: YERqTU UY Bel HATE UAT “AT
fowarrraret fenfradt 4 Wrarrera wate frwefay
frag wart जतं व्ये (०. ५. 7) ” रविव विचा पूागमतः पुष
अलं कथितम्‌ ॥

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 285] =====
Cuarren LXIX.
Signs of the Five Great Men.

1, By the planets being powerfal, standing in their own

asterisms, in their culmination, or in the centres (i.¢. the first,
fourth, seventh and tenth houses), will be born the five
exalted personages I am now going to speak of.

2. By Jupiter being in its power will be bern (the per-_

sonage denominated) Hansa; by Saturn, the man Cara; by
Mars, the Rucaka ; by Mercury, the Bhadra; and by Venus,
the Malavya.

8, 4. The person’s character, in its fulness, derives from

the Sun (in fall power); the qualities of body and mind,
from the Moon's power. Moreover, the man will show the
eame characteristics with (the lord of) any subdivision San
and Moon happen to stand in; eo that he will agree in
temperament, elements, nature, complexion, colour, cha-
raoter, shape, etc.! When the Sun and Moon, while occupy-
ing such and such a subdivision, are weak, the persons to be
born will have characteristics of a mixed nature.

5. From Mars comes spirit ; from Mercury weight; from

Jupiter the voice; from Venus grace; from Saturn the .

colour.® The qualities will be good or bad, according to
” the planets being well or ill ciroumstanced.

6. Persons with qualities of mixed nature will not be-
come sovereigns, but have a similar course of life and become
happy men. The differences arise from the benign planets
(i.e. fall moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus) being stationed
in the house of their enemy, or in descension, or from their
being looked at by the evil’ planets.

7. The length and stretch of the Hansa® is of 96 digits.

1 For the dhdtu or ofra, of. Bh. Jitaka, il. 111 for the five clements, `

6; for the character and shape, 8-11; for the colour,
* Cf. Brb. Jitaka, il. 1 व = SG
* Le. what we call Phenix, metaphorically. * ~र

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 286] =====
284

The personages going by the names of Cara, Rucaks,
Bhadra and Malavya, are each taller than the preceding by
three digits.

8. A person in whom the quality of goodness predomi
nates will possess charity, steadiness, uprightness of chs-
racter and piety to Gods and Brahmans. One in whom the
quality of passion is uppermost will have the mind addicted
to poetry, art, sacrifices and women, besides being a great
hero.

9. He in whom the quality of gloom prevails will be a
cheat, stupid, lasy, irascible and sleepy. As the qualities of
goodness, passion and gloom may be differently combined, ~
there will be seven kinds of persons with mixed characters,

10. The MAlavya will be marked by arms resembling an
elephant’s trunk, and by hands reaching to the knoes. His
members and joints are fleshy; he has a well-proportioned
and neat frame, and a slender waist. His face, of oblong
form, measures thirteen digits, the transverse measure be-
tween the ears being three digits less. He has fiery eyes,
comely cheeks, even and white teeth, and not too thick lips.

11. Having by his valour obtained wealth, he will, resid-
ing in the recesses of Mount Pariyatra, reign as a wise king
over MAlava, Bharoach, Surdshtra, Léts, Sindh, and eo forth.

12. This MAlavya will at the age of seventy years piously
depart from life at a place of pilgrimage.—Having in due ~
form indicated the characteristics of this man, I now pro-
“coed to mention those of the others,

18. The man Bhadra is marked by having the arms thick,
equal, round and long ; his length is equal to the stretch of
his arms from otie side to the other; his cheeks are covered
with soft, small and dense hairs.

14. In his constitution ekin and sperm are predominant ;
his breast is broad and thick ; his prevailing quality is good.
ness. Hoe has a tiger-like face, is steadfast, वि
virtuous, grateful; ho has the pace of an elephant, and
knows many sciences.

16. He is eagacious, handsome, clever in the arts, con-

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 287] =====
285

stant, an adept at ascetic philosophy ; has the forehead and
temples well-shaped ; the loins likewise; the hands and fect
hued like the lotus calix; the nose fine; the eyebrows even
and well-knit.
_ 16. His person emells like earth when moist from fresh
rain, or cassia-leaf, saffron, frontal juice of elephants, agal-
lochum. The hair of his head is black, curled, and such
tit each single hair has its own pore. Sicut equi vel
‘ elephantis, pudenda ejus non conspicus.

17. His hands and feet are marked by the figure of a
plough, pestle, club, sword, conch-shell, quoit, elephant,
sea-monster, lotus, chariot. His imperiouaness will be fully
experienced by his people, for, self-willed as he is, he does
not spare even his own kin. “

18. Should his length come to 84 digits, and his weight
to one bkéra, then he will be lord over the Middle country ;
but if he have the fall measure implied in the words “taller
by three digits” (st. 7), he will be emperor of the whole
country.

19. After dutifully ruling the country he acquired by his.
bravery, the Bhadra, at eighty years of age, will depart
from life at a place of pilgrimage, and go to heaven.
_ _ 20. The Caga will have somewhat projecting, otherwise
fine teeth, fine nails, blubber eyes; a swift pace; he takes
delight in science, mining and trade; has fall cheeks; is
false; a good general ; fond of love’s sport and partial to
other men’s wives; restless, valorous, obedient to his mother, —
and attached to woods, hills, rivers and wildernesecs,

21. The same Cara is suspicious, and a keen observer of
another's weak points. He is 92 digits in length, and, not
’ Deing very heavy, has a soft step. The chief constituent of
his body is marrow. ह ,

22. His waist is slender; the lines on his hands and feet
show the figures of a buckler, sword, lute, couch, garland,
dram, trident, and run in an upward direction.

28. This Qaca will be a border chieftain or provincial
governor. His body afflicted with colic or a fistula on the
buttocks, he will, seventy years old, reach Yama’s home.

र न by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 288] =====
286

' 24, The marks of the Hansa are: the mouth red; the
face gold-coloured, and showing thick cheeks and an ele-
vated nose; the head round; the eyes honey like; the nails
wholly red; the figures (formed by the lines ow hands and
fect) similar to garlands, fillets, elephant’s hooks, conch-
shells, intertwined fishbraces, sacrificing implements, water-
pots and lotuses; the voice sweet ‘as a swan’s; the feet
well-shaped ; the senses subdued.

25. He delights in water; the predominant constituent
in him is sperm; his weight comes to 1600 palas, whereas
his length, according to the statement of the Sages, will be
96 digits. `

26. The Hansa will possess the country of Khasa,
Cdrasena, Gandhara, and the land between the Ganges and
Jamna, After exercising the royal power for 90 years,' he
will meet death within a'wood.

27. (The worthy Rucaka by name) will have good eye-
brows and hairs; a red-tinged dusky colour; a neck marked
with three folds like a shell; an oblong face. He is brave,
cruel, an egregious counsellér, a chief of robbers, and a

28. The measure of Rucaka’s face, in length, being taken
four times, gives the measure of his middle. His skin is
thin ; in his temperament blood and flesh are the chief parts.
Ho is a killer of foes, and attains his objects by dint of
reckless audacity. ~

29. His hands and feet are marked with figures like a
club, lute, bull, bow, thunderbolt, spear; moon and trident.
Ho shows picty towards his gurus, to Brahmans and deities.
His length is a hundred digits; his weight a thousand pa/as.

30. He is an adept in charms and spells, and has thin
knees and legs. When this Rucaka has reigned as king

" This is evidently = mistake of the author’s; he certainly means,
“at ninety years of age the H. will die,” but bis words ceavey quite a
different menaing. Better in the Strive: W@erqut TyTtagt
पञादनास्े खमुधैति WTA... It most, however, be noticed that the
anther of the Sirtvall is posterior to Varthe-mibira.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 289] =====
287

over the Vindhya, Sahyagiri and Ujein, he will, on reaching
«seventy years, find his death by the sword or fire.

81. There are five other men, who will be the attendants
of the fore-mentioned monarchs, vis. Vamanaka, Jaghanye,
Kubja, Mandalaka and Samin.! Now listen by what tokens
these men, generally called the “ mixed ones,” are character-
ized,

82, Vamanaka is corpulent, hunchbacked, and somewhat

broad in the middle and between the armpits. He will bea
fan ous servant of king Bhadra, Prosperous, liberal in giving,
and devoted to Vasudeva.

33. Ho called Jaghanya will be a servant to Malavys:
His ears are similar to a crescent ; the joints of his body are
good; sperm is the principal part of his temperament; he
is a denunciator, a poet, rough of skin, and has gross hands
and fingers.

34, The same Jaghanya will be cruel, rich, of comprehen-
‘ sive* intellect, generally famous, red of complexion, and a
jocose fellow. On his breast, feet and hands, he shows the
figure of a sword, spear, noose and axe. .

35, 36. As to the man of the name of Kubjs, he shows
no defects in the lower members, but is somewhat shrunk in
the forepart of the body and crooked. He will bo an at-
tendant on Hansa, an atheist, rich, learned, brave, an
informer, grateful, ingenious in arts, quarrelsome, have
plenty of retainers, and be wife-ridden. This eaid Kubja,
always stirring, will on a sudden leave this world to which
he was so much attached. .

87. He named Mandalaka will be a follower of RBucaka’s,
an adept in spells, clever, and devoted to acts of witchcraft,
ghost-banning and the like, and to sciences.

38. He looks elderly, has rough and coarse hair, is able
in destroying enemies, devoted to the Brahmans, deities,
religious worship and ascetic philosophy; swayed by his
wife, and intelligent. ^

ह 1

* Tt ls not 8 little curious that In one codes of the Comm. Wate

22

is explained by WETGTE, in the other by HETETE. .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 290] =====
288

89. As to Samin, he will be a retainer to Qaca, very mis-
shapen of body, liberal in giving, and » man that performs
deeds by powerfal enterprise. For the rest, he will in his
qualities resemble (aga. *

 

Cuarten LXX.
Signs of Women.

1. If one aspire to become lord of the country, let him
marry a girl whose feet are sleek, elevated, thin at the
extremity, with red nails and ancles equal, not bony, nice”
and not protruding; with connected toes and rosy soles.

2. Of good augury are feet marked with fishes, hooks,
lotuses, barley-corns, thunderbolts, ploughs and swords; not
sweaty and soft on the soles. So, too, legs not hairy, without
prominent veins, aad quite round ; knees even and not fat at
the joints!

4. Broed, plump and heavy hips to support the girdle,
and a navel deep, large and turned to the right, are held of

omen in women.

5. A female middle with three folds and not hairy;
breasts round, close to each other, equal and hard; a bosom
devoid of hair and soft, and a neck marked with three lines,
bring wealth and joys.

6, A swelling lip hued like the blossom of Pentapetes or~
the brilliant Bimbe fruit, and equal teeth white as jessamine
bods, are such qualities in wives as will be conducive to the
husband’s joy and immense advantage.

7. A tone of voice sweet as the kokila’s and swan’s,

Comm: AUT समुद्रः
सिग्धौ ताखनस्यौ घन्वौ ूर्गपु्टौ सुजोहितौ ।
भिनूढनुश्फौ सुदि्टौ घनाङ्ुशिखमन्वितौ ॥
इ्वसवायिचिद्धितौ ।
- भुखयधौ रोमरदितौ कुमा्थाखरथौ मुमौ ॥

‘The translation of the third stanza is omitted.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 291] =====
289

genteel, sincere, not grovelling, is attended with much happi-
ness. A straight, handsome nose, with even nostrils, and an
eye vieing with the lustre of the petals of the dark lotus,
are esteemed of good foreboding.

8. Auspicious are brows curved like a crescent, not knit
together, not too broad, not hanging. Likewise a forehead.
neither low nor lofty, of the shape of a crescent, and not
hairy.

9. They deem it also of good augury that the two ears
are properly thick, soft, equal and close to the head. Hairs
sleek, dark, soft, curled and coming forth one by one from
the pores, bring joy; 8o does a head of moderate size.!

10. Damsels who bear the following marks on foot or
handpalm attain to the state of queen, vis. waterpota, scata,
horses, elephants, Bilva-fruits, sacrificial posts, arrows, gar-

ds, ear ornaments, chowries, hooks, barleycorns, rocks,
standards, archways, fishes, crossés, altars, fans, conch-shelle,
umbrellas, lotuses.

11. Hands with not prominent pulses, and similar in
colour to the inside of young lotuses; with slender fingers
the joints of which are placed far from each other;
proper to king’s wives. A palm neither too flat nor too
rising, and showing good lines, secures to her who owns it
tho possession of children, pleasure and wealth, and causes
her to be not widowed for a long time.

12. A line running from the pulse up to the middle finger,
either in a woman’s handpalm or a man’s, as well as a line
going upward along the footeole,* will lead to the joy of
sovereignty.

13. The line that, issuing from below the little finger, runs
to between the fore and middle finger, insures the longest
term of life; the shorter it is, the shorter will be one’s life.

14. At the bottom of the thumb are the lines of progeny.

› 0००४, : तद्याच अर्जः `
गोत्रतं ाववा निनं शिरः सौग्छप्रदं सुतम्‌ ।

* The azthor seems to mean “a line on the footsole renalag from
the beel to the toe.”

न by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 292] =====
290 ~ 2

Big lines denote beys; thin ones girls. Long-lived persons
will have them long and uninterrupted ; short-lived ones, `
short and broken off.

15. Herewith has been told what promises goo?’in females ;
anything contrary to it is pronounced evil. I will now

‘ briefly mention the consequences that are particularly
execrable.

16. A wife whose little toe or the one next to it does not
touch the ground, or whose second toe extends beyond the
great toe, is a most vile whore. ध

17. Legs either lean or! too plump, covered with veins,
hairy, with the calves drawn up; a pudendum wry to the `
leftward, low and small, and a potlike belly, are proper to
unhappy females.

18. 4 short ‘neck with a woman announces poverty; &
long one, the ruin of the family; a broad and prominent
one, malignancy. ‘

19. She who has squint,’ or tawny, or grey and fickle
eyes, will be of a bed character, and she who, when smiling,
shows dimples in her cheeks, is pronounced unquestionably
to be an unchaste wife.

20. If the forehead is hanging over, she will kill her
brother-in-law; is it the belly that projects, she is to kill
her father-in-law; is it the buttocks, her husband. A

3 This is the meading of cs; WATS Ait: --
शुष्के बद्धे frais wr Crag ifr’
.चष्ठाः खा दुःखिता नित्वं पुषवि्तविवर्जिता ॥

A var. reading, obviously a bad conjecture, exhibits विमसि च १०५४
and vimdmes mean exactly the same. धि
3 "The Comm. explains kekare by kdcare, a word denoting the colour
of m cat's eyes in KathAsarit-sigars, 65, 163, and 167. It occars also

in a parallel passage, probably from Garga; WETS
चारावताथी था war काचराथी तथापिवा।
इद्ानचपलाची च तां कन waa: a
It ts by wo menas likely that in this passage Kdcera is used in the sease
Of kekare.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 293] =====
291

female being excessively tall, and having the upper lip
covered with too thick hair, brings no good to her husband.
* 21, Hairy, smutty looking and lompish breasts, and un-
equal ears, produce misery. Big, protruding and unequal
teeth bode misery, and black gums thievishness.

22. Hands lean, showing thick veins, unequal, and marked
with figures like beasts of prey, wolves, rooka, herons, worms -
and owls, are proper to women deprived of joy and wealth.

23. A female having the upper lip very high, and the hair
coarse at the ends, likes quarrel. Generally speaking, vices
will be found with the ugly, whereas the virtues reside there
where beauty dwells.

On the Division'of the Human Body in General.

24. The first division (of the limbs) consists of the feet
along with the ancles; the second, of the legs with the knee-
pans; the third, of the sexual member, thighs and scrotum ;
the fourth, of the navel and hip.

25. They call the belly the fifth division ; the sixth is the
heart along with the paps; the seventh, the shoulder and
nape of the neck; the eighth, the lips and neck. ,

26. The eyes along with the brows make the ninth di-
vision ; head and forehead the tenth. The feet and farther
divisions being ill-favoured, are indicative of an unhappy
lot; their being auspicious, of a. lucky lot. ध

Cuarrer LXXI.
Omens from Slits of Garments.
1. In the corners of a.cloth dwell deities ;! in the middle
part of the upper and lower ends men ; whilst the remaining
* It must be understood that the cloth Is to be divided into nine
compartments: WUTY मर्गः
Wea ay ATA WANT AAT |
चिधा दान्तपाश्राले चिधा भधवं पुषकपुषक्‌ ॥ `

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 294] =====
292

three portions fall to the share of the spirits of darkness, ॥
The same applies to couches, seats and shoes. ~

2. When a cloth gets soiled by ink, cowdugg, mud and
the like,—when it is slit, singed or rent,—you may reckon
that the effects, good or bad, shall be complete, if the cloth
"be new ;.but always decreasing the more it has been used. `
‘The effects are more intensive, in case of an upper garment. -

8. A alit, eto., in the portions of the spirits of darkness
bodes illness, if not death ; in one of the portions of men,
it bodes the birth of a son and power; in a part presided
over by deities, increase of enjoyments. A flaw in any tip
is declared unfavourable. ॥

` 4. 4 elit in figure like a heron, pelican, owl, pigeon,
crow, beast of prey, jackal, ass, camel or snake, although it
appear in a portion presided over by deities, causes among
men a danger amounting todeath,  —s. .

5. A slit of the ‘shape of an umbrella, standard, cross,
Vardhamana, Crivpksha, waterpot, lotus, archway, and the
like, should it even be found in the- parts allotted to the
demons, brings men speedy fortune.

6. The asterism Acvini! gives plenty of garments, but
Bharant takes them away. A cloth (being worn for the first
time) at Kryttiké will be burnt; at Rohini, it will bring
wealth and success.

7. (From a garment being firet used) at Mrgaciras, there
will ensue danger to it from mice ; at Ardra, the very death; ~
at Punarvasa, good luck; at the asterism next to it (i.e
Pushya), acquisition of riches. ^

8. (If a new cloth is put on) at Agleshé, it will be torn;
at Maghd, it announces death; at Parva-Phalgunt, danger
from the sovereign. Uttara-Phalgunt is conducive to ao-
-quisition of wealth.

9. By Hasta enterprises will succeed; by Citré good
luck is coming. The putting on a new garment at Svati is
auspicious ; by doing so at Vigakhé, one will become gene-
rally beloved. .

५ ६.९. ॥ Agvial be the asterism of the day on which a garment is
worn the Gret time, the consequences mentioned are to ensuc.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 295] =====
293

10. Meeting with a friend is the result (of a new garment)

» at Anurddh&. The cloth will be ruined, if used for the first

time at Jyeshthé, and it will get a ducking in water, if put

‘on at Mila. Diseases (attend one’s using a new cloth) at
Parva-Ashadha.

11, 12. He who wishes to use a new garment at Uttara-
AshAdhA may, it is deemed, expect dainty food; at Cravana,
ophthalmy; at Dhanishthé, acquisition of corn; at Cata-
bhishaj, great danger occasioned by poison; at Pirva-Bhadra-
pad, danger from water; at Uttara-Bhadrapada, getting of
sons, and at Revati, as they state, possession of jewels.

18, Using a new garment, even st an unlucky asterism,
will have satisfactory effects, if it be worn with permission
of Brahmans, or if it have bean bestowed by the king, or
procured for the wedding ceremony.

14, (Using a new garment, even at an unlucky asterism,
is approved of on the wedding day, as a token of royal
favour, or with permission of Brahmans.)

Cnarrer LXXII.
Signs of Chowries.

1, They say the gods have created the Yaoks in the dens
of the Snowy Mountains for the tail’s sake. The hairs of
their tails are some yellowish, some black, some white.

2. Sleekness, softness, density of the hairs, brightness,
the being connected with a small bone, and whiteness, are
pronounced to be the good qualities in chowries. Such as
are defective, small or broken off, are bad.

3. The handle to the chowrie must measure one cubit, or
one and a half, or otherwise an ell, Made from favourable
wood, decked with gold and silver, and ornamented with
variegated gems, it will be to the benefit of kings.

. 4 Clubs, umbrellas, elephant’s hooks, canes, bows, cano-
pies, halberds, standards and chowries with sticks of pale
colour, are fit for Brahmans; of the’ hue of Cooculus cordi-

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 296] =====
294

folius for Kshatriyas ; with honey-coloured ones for Vai¢yas ;
with black ones for (Adras.

5. Sticks with an even number of knots, jwo, four, and
so forth up to twelve, produce, successively: loses of a
mother, of land, wealth, family, engender sickness, and
death.

6. The same having an odd number of knots, three, five,
seven, and so on, will secure to the owners success in journey-
ing, destruction of enemies, much gain, acquisition of land,
increase of cattle, and fulfilment of wishes.

Cuartgr LXXIII.
Signs of Umbrellas.

1, 2; 8. A white umbrella constructed either ' of feathers
of swans, cocks, peacocks and cranes, or covered entirely
with new silk-cloth; studded with péarls; dark with gar-
lands hanging down; with a pommel of crystal and a stick
of pure gold; six cubits long; containing nine, seven knots
ora single; having three cubits in extension; all over well
covered; adorned* with jewels;—such an umbrella, kept
high aloft, will tend to a sovereign’s benefit and bring
victory. ५
4. The umbrells sticks of a prince royal, queen, com-—
mander-in-chief and general, must be made such as ६6
measure, in succession: 4}, 5, 4 and 2 digits.

5. Let other officers have their umbrellas decorated at the
top with gold fillets as tokens of royal favour; furnished
+ with hanging wreaths and jewels, and made from peacock’s

* feathers.

6. Private persons should have the umbrella stick of a
equare form, bat the umbrella of Brahmans is to be made
with an entirely round stick.

‘1 In the text read Y—Y, and not, as it is printed, Y—J.
* Read im the printed text afar, ००५ विभूषित.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 297] =====
295

Cuartsz LXXIV.
Praise of Women.

1. Tn the domain* of « country there is one city pera-
mount; in the city one mansion, and in that mansion one
place, and in this » couch, and on the couch a choice wife,
brilliant with jewels, who is the quintessence of royal
enjoyment,

, 2. Towels are set off by women, but these latter do not
derive their splendour from the lustre of jewels: lovely
maidens captivate the heart, even without gems, whereas
gems do not, unless connected with a woman’s form. . .

8. For princes who are anxious to conceal their inward
emotions; who exert their strength to subdue the power of
the enemy; who are pondering on policy entangled by the
ramifications of business consequent upon eo many things
committed or omitted; who have to follow? the decisions of
their counsellors; have reasons for suspicion on every side,
or are plunged into a ees of troubles,—it is a drop of joy to
embrace a dear love. . ^

4. There is not anywhere by the Creator produced a
gem, woman excepted, that on being heard, seen, touched,
yea remembered, awakens gladness in men. For her sake
do virtue and wealth exist; from her are children and
worldly pleasures : esteem then women like the goddesses of
Fortune in the house by giving them honour and influgnoe.

5. And those who from aversion proclaim the faults of
women and pass over their virtues, I inwardly suspect to be
malicious men, whose sayings do not proceed from honest
motives. “

1 This chapter forms, with the four following, the Antabpuraciatl or -
Reflections on Womankind.

* The word jaya is explained by Utpala with ojjeye, quite right, if
the latter be taken in the sense of domain, dominion. That vijaye aad
ojjitem occar in this acceptation is noticed in the translator's disserta-
५०७ “ Over de jaartelling der Zuldelijke Budabistes,” p. 90 and p. 108,

> Read futfirgt. . :

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 298] =====
296

6. Speak out the truth, what offence is there in females
that is not committed by males? They are outdone by men
in impadenoe, but excel them in virtues. Ag so says Manu
about this matter : ‘

7. “Soma has given them purity, the Gandharvas a
trained voice, and Agni the faculty of eating all sorts of
food. Hence women are like unto pure gold.

& “Brahmans are clean at the feet ; cows are eo on the
back; goate and horses in the face; but women are clean all
over.

9. “They are objects of matchless purity ; in no way can
they be defiled, for every month do their courses carry off all
faults.

10. “Those houses that are cursed by their female inmates
being undutifully treated shall totally perish, as if struck by
witchoraft. ,

11. * Whether it be your wife or your mother, (do consider
that) men are sprung from women. What pleasure’ can
you expect, O ungrateful men! in reviling both ?

12. “It has been established in the moral code that there
where man and wife go astray, both have equal guilt. Men
do not regard it; women then are better in this respect.

18. “On transgressing against his wife; a man may ex-
piste his sin by wearing for six months an ase’s hide with
_ the hair turned oatward.

14. “(A wife’s) amorous inclination will not in a hundred”
years pass away. Men leave off from it by impotence,
women by self-command. ध

16. ५0 for the impudence of the wicked! who revile
blameless females, and like thieves, themselves engaged in
the act of stealing, cry out ‘hold, thief! hold, thief.’”
~ 16, The coaxing words* a man utters to the sweetheart in
privacy, he is apt to forget afterwards, but a wife will from
gratitade embrace her lifeless husband, and eo enter the fire
(of the pile)

1 Utpala reads cubhem, “ good, boon.”
> Im the text read WEWTfM, with the « short.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 299] =====
297

17. He who possesses a jewel of a wife, let him be never
#0 poor, is, to my judgment, a king. Dainty dishes and
women are the quintessence of royalty, the rest being but
fuel to kindle the fire of appetite.

18, A voluptuous delight equal to that you feel when
embracing # peramour in the prime of youth, with swelling
bosom, and murmuring sounds, soft, lovely, tender and sup-
pressed, is not to be found, I mean, in Brahma’s heaven.

19. (If you demur to this, please) tell me what pleasure
is there, owing to gods, Sages, seraphs and heavenly choristers
attending on the Fathers and other worshipfal beings, such
as not to be found in embracing a woman in privacy ?

20. This whole universe, from Brahma downwards to the
very worms, depends upon the union of male and female.
Why then should we feel ashamed of it, when the Lord
himeelf, from desire of a maiden,* assumed four faces P

 

Onarrer LXXV.
Winning of Affection,

1, All genuine enjoyment of love is his न्या, who is
beloved ; others do not get but the shadow, as the mind<is
far away.

2. Like a tree’s cutling broken off and planted in the
. soil, or a seed sown in it, retains the nature of the plant,
even #0 one’s very nature is reborn within the wife, though’
some difference may be produced by the varying circum-
stances of the soil.

8. The soul combines with the mind; the mind with the
organs; the organs with their objects, and that in quick

" In the text change Bf into Ht. The sentiment expressed in this
half stanza reminds one of Barger’s: .
“ Wie selig wer sein Liebchen hat,
Wie eelig lebt der Mann.
Er lebt wie in der Kaiserstadt
Kein Fiirst und Graf es Kann.”

4 TilottamA, of course. .

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 300] =====
298

succession, This being the natural process, what would be
unattainable for the mind? And whither the mind goes,
thither goes the very soul (the principle of tife).

‘4. This soul lies concealed within one’s own heart, but
may be observed by an attentive mind through continual
application. Now, since every one identifies himself with
the person he cherishes in his mind, therefore women are in
their thoughts with the beloved one, and with no other.

6. Genteelnoss, in the very first place, is the cause that
you will be beloved ; a contrary behaviour produces aversion.
Charms, philters and such-like quackeries are attended with
many evils, but no help. .

6. You will get beloved by forsaking pride; arrogance
engenders dislike. The arrogant man will with great diffi-
culty socoiplih his ends, where the affable man will with
ease.

7, It is not indicative of vigour, to be partial of violent
measures, and to speak odious, ill-devised words. Those are
strong, who perform their work calntly ; not those who are
boasting. ^

8. If you wish to be generally liked, tell everybody's
good parts in his abeence. By dwelling on another's faults,

will incur many charges, even unmerited.

9. If a man tries to benefit every one, the world st large
will try to benefit him in every way, and the reputation you
shall get by bestowing benefits upon enemies in distress,
shall prove of no little value. `

10. Virtue may be obscured for a while; it will, like fire
concealed by grass, grow the stronger, and he who desires to
efface his fellow’s virtues will reap nothing but the character
of a bad man.

—_—_—_—_———_——_———_-
Cuartzn LXXVI.
Erotioal Remedies.

1, When (at the time of .coition) the blood exceeds the
sperm, a female will be conceived ; in the contrary case,

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 301] =====
299

male; when blood and sperm are equal, a hermaphrodite.!
Hence one should avail oneself of potions fit to increase
sperm.*

2. The flat roof of a mansion, moonbeams, lotus, spring,
a sweet girl languid with the effects of wine, a lute, privacy,
and garlands: these constitute the ensnaring net of love.

8. By swallowing a mixture of mineral honey, bee's
honey, quicksilver, iron dust, yellow myrobalan, bitumen,
vermifuge and gheoe,? during twenty-one‘ days, one will,
however old, be he an octogenarian, pleasure a girl as if he
were @ young man. *.

4. If one drink milk boiled with cowach roots, or pease
cooked in milk and ghee, every sixth portion being followed
by a potion of milk, he shall not be exhausted by women.

ˆ 6, A man having numerous wives should take powder of
Batates paniculata with its own sap, repeatedly commixed,
and then dried, and drink along with it milk boiled with
sugar. `
6. On swallowing powder of emblic myrobalan with its
own sap, well commixed, and joined to honey, sugar and
ghee, and on drinking milk after, a mian may at heart’s
content indulge love, when the remedy has been digested.

7. Siquis amasius lacte un& cum testibus hircinis conoocto
saepe conspersa sesama, deinde bene siccata, ederit, posthac
lao biberit, quomodo ei passer antecellet P

8. Men who take boiled Shashtika rice with ghee and
pease porridge, and after. it drink milk, shall over night not
abate.in the sport of love.®

" Cf. Sucrata, 1. p. 821. ॥
* Cf. Socruta, Ii, p. 153, sqq., with the contents of this chapter
throughout. a
° ०००. ; एतानि चुतमाविकवं ख्वाथि सममाबावि कावाकि ।* ` `
चुतमाचिकाम्बां भावयित्वा गुलिका (५.५. ए) काया ॥ ।
* It is strange that all MSS, agree in exhibiting FaNfTTETfA; the:
author ought to have written—I dare not say, bas writtea—fayfa-
महानि. 7 ,
* The Commentator has-met understood” the passage, because he

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 302] =====
800

9. A mixtare of Batatas paniculata and Shashtika-rice,
pounded, with sesamum, Physalis and cowach root, the whole
soaked in goat’s milk and ghee, then boiled, will be a very
invigorating pudding.

10. After applying Asteracanths longifolia with milk, or -
eating the bulbs of Batatas paniculata, one will not be
exhausted (in sexual intercourse), if the remedy be well
digested. Should the digestion be slow, you may apply the
following powder.

11. Yellow myrobalan with Ajowan and salt; pepper with
ginger (take equal portions of them, and pound the whole);
have the powder soaked in vinous liquor, buttermilk, sour ”
gruel and boiling water. This is a micture for promoting

digestion.

12. One’ who takes to the habit of eating excessively sour,
bitter, salt or pungent things, and meals chiefly consisting of
saline potherbs, will lose the power of sight, sperm and
manhood, and so, after getting s woman, he will, however
young,. make several sham attempts,’ as if he were an old

 

Ouarrern LXXVII.
Preparing of Perfumes.
1. Since wreaths, perfumes, pastils, garments, ornaments, .
eto., are not beseeming in a man with white hairs, one should
have care of dyeing the hair, no lees than of unguents and
ornaments.
2. Pat into an iron vessel grains of Paspalum, boiled in
vinegar, with iron dust; pound the whole fine; apply it to
| the head after wetting the hair with vinegar, and keep the
head covered with wet! leaves.

wrongly takes HEM W to be one word, in the instrumental case:
Hence his explanation HER GE WIA is quite wrong; QT means
here the same as Wigfit, खवसीद्न्ति.

1 According to the readisg of the Comm., viz. érdrapatreip. The .

term of the printed text le rendered: “with leaves of Celotrepis.”

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 303] =====
301

8, After six hours take them off; thereon apply to the
head an unguent of emblic myrobalan, and have it for six
hours wrapt in leaves. On being washed, the head shall
‘become black. :

4. Thereupon remove the smell of iron and vinegar from
the head by means of scented hair-waters and scented oils,
sweet perfames and sundry pastils, and so indulge in the
royal pleasure in the female apartments.!

5. A ecented hair-water fit for kings is prepared from
equal proportions of Cassia-bark, costus, Renuka, Nall, Trigo-
nella, myrrh, Tabernaemontana and Andropogon schoenan-
thus, mingled with Mesua* and Taméla leaf (Xanthochymus),

6. Hair oil of the scent of Oampaka is made from
powder of madder, cuttlefish bone, Nakhi (shell perfume),
Cassia-bark, costus and myrrh, which, after being parched
in the sun’s rays, should be mixed with oil. ,

7, From equal proportions of Tamila-leaf, olibanum,
Andropogon echoenanthus, and Tabernaemontans is prepared
@ perfume (going by the name of) “Incentive of love.”
The same, combined with fragrant Dhyams grass?-and fumi-

॥ Between stanzas 4 and 5 the Comm. inserts the following remarks:
अश द्रव्याणां सर्वेषां परायः कालिकेन चाखनं। निर्मलेन केषाधिष्यलेष ।
केषाधिद्नोमूषेण । गसं तिलतेवेनायखमाष्ड्ं पचेत्‌ । मुदयिना पाक-
बैधवोधधूपनानि लोकतो चेयानि । यतः सकखयंहितासामिनाय्या-
ATT | rege creat erent feat | wren तथाविध-

मच मरावीद्छमतस्ण्वैलोकग्बवहारतः काः परयोगमभियम इति ॥

* The Identification of the drugs enumerated here and in the sequel
rests chiefly upon the authority of the Commentator.

* With two MSS., read WwyTeit, because something else is re-
quired but a term for kushtha, which occurs in the next line. Now
the word WITH is a synonym of |B, though the dictionaries give WTfig
and a much suspected ITT. The proof that WTfW aad WT are
right ls this: kushtha denotes “costus,” and “a certain disease
(leprosy).” As WTP means “ discase,” the words are considered
synonymous, and, according to Indian fashioi, laterchangeable. Con-
sequently we have to look for another synoaym in WITH. This werd

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 304] =====
302

gated with Areca nut and Assafoetids,’ yields a perfume
(called) “Bakula-scent.” The same with costus is
* Lotus-scent,” and with sandal, “ Campaka-scent.” Allied
with nutmeg, Osssia-bark and coriander, it goes by the
denomination of “ Gaertners-ecent.” .
~ 8. For one-fourth anise and pine-resin; for one-half
Nekhi? and olibanum ; and for one-fourth sandal and fragrant
Priyangu:? these make a perfume which is to be famigated
by sugar and Nakhi. ॥

9. Bdellium, Andropogon schoenanthus, lac, cyperus
grass, Nakhi and sugar (in equal -proportions), constitute a
compounded perfume. Another is made from spikenard,-
Andropogon echoenanthus, Nakhi and sandal.

10. Many nice compounded perfumes sre prepared from
yellow mytobalan, Nakhi, Cassia-bark,* myrrh, Andropogon

is wanting in the dictionaries in the sense of “disease,” but there is
_ not the slightest doubt of its existence, because WIA = रोय; मयति,
ete., is common enough. Consequently ग्यास = व्याधि. „०० व्याधि =
„ ४८०९० चचाम = कुष्ठ. Herewith Is established the existence of
tyfina in the scceptation of “disease, evil,” and It follows that the
reading WT in one MS. of the Comm. is corrupted. Another question
„ remains: “what did Utpala read?” He paraphrases WITH (so in
the MSS.) with forgzereg. According to the dictlonaries the latter
sheald be Solanum Jacquinl ; it may be, but is as yet rather doubtfal.
In a list of botanical terms to be found in the Comm. we fad this, un-
bapplly corrupted, line: TFET (¥- le तोनो) मालो राम॑जो ("1 TAA)
व्यापकं (,.1. व्धामकै) ेवदग्धकम्‌ । .
The term devedagdhake is unknown to the dictionaries ; it is the same
with Utpala’s निर्दग्यक (either masc. or neut. and not fem., though the
dictionaries know only a fem. foremeT@T, etc.).
व Comm. takes Aings to be biellium or vermilion; fgg: i fees: |
दूति प्रयिदः। 9९6 99 reason for this, as Assafoctida is ex-
tensively used in India.

» 0००. गं श्रङ्खोद्वं चरम ।

» [० धर धम्य भानो.

« Reading and readering equally doubtfal, In my MSS. of the
Comm. it le here written QM, elsewhere WH. Utpala gives here no

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 305] =====
303

echoenanthus,. sugar, costus, benzoin and cyperus-grass, by
inoreasing the proportion of each subsequent drug out of the
nine by }, }, and eo forth.

11. Four proportions of sugar, benzoin and cyperus-grass ;

’ two of turpentine and SAltree-resin; one of Nakhi and
bdellium : let all this be made into a lamp with honey, and
let the scent be excited by camphor! The result:is a
compounded perfume termed Kopacchada (i.e. concealing
anger), worthy of kings.

12. A powder from Cassia-bark, Andropogon muricatus
and Tamiala-leaf, in three portions, allied with half s portion
of small cardamums, is an excellent perfume for clothes,
when the scent has been revived by musk and camphor.

18, 14. An immense number of perfumes can be made

. from sixteen substances, if every four of them are per-
muted at will, and that in one, two, three or four proportions.*

paraphrase, but in st. 29 he explains it by paripelavem. This term,
however, is synonymous with musta, and as the latter is enumerated
apart in st. 10 and 24, Uspala must be mistaken, unless, contrary te
the authority of the dictionaries, paripelevem be not = musta. Even
if we prefer ghana, we are not sure that Cassia-bark is intended; ef.
however st. 12 and 24. , ‘

' The Comm. gives a definition of the terms vedhe and इन्दा wz

wat wt gad = a 1 efit weet Stak | Mw) He

quotes for the purpose a distich in Prakrit, from igvare, an anther oa
the art of preparing perfimes: SWEATY Set WEA
wufawy cafag at frere Set ft at afew)

Wret By aT Gat ys faferwrer arrears
‘The last words should be corrected, I think, Into faefiq way wat (or

अन्धस्सि ० बन्धम्मि) = Skr. Freel AR; the rest is clear.

* ९००; अतो ऽख्ाद्रग्वयणादेतेरेव चनादिमिखतुर्भितुर्भिः खे-
ख्टापरिवर्तितैरादमीयेष्डापरिथामितर्विपर्य्ीछतिः | wer | wate
चिचतुभभिरनवार्यवो गन्धमुद्रो भवति। अच वोडद्र कोरकाः कावाः।
तिर्यक्‌ चलारो.घो-धचस्वार (such a receptacle 1७ ०००4 » कच्छपुद) | - `
तचायकोढवासमनूति चवापाढठकमेव नादीनि विन्यख्ानि EET |

ति by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 306] =====
ध
204 ` , ^

The drags are: Cassia-bark, Andropogon schoenanthus,
bensoin, Curcuma Zerumbet,' Andropogon muricatus, Mesua,
“euttlefish-bone, Trigonella, agallochum,“ Artemisia, Nakhi,
Tabernaemontana, coriander, Cora and sandal. -

"16. Always take only one proportion of coriander, and
atill lees of camphor; of neither add two or more propor-
tions, because otherwise their scent would be too powerful.

16. The enumerated drugs must be fumigated with pine-
resin, turpentine, sugar and Nakhi, severally, not combined.
As 9 means to revive the fragrancy, add musk and camphor.

17. The number of perfumes resulting from sixteen in-
gredients (being mixed in all possible combinations) is 4000:
+70000-+-100000-+4-720 (=174720). .

18. Each drug taken in one proportion, being combined
with three others in two, three and four proportions, suo-
ceesively, makes six sorts of scents. Likewise when taken
in two, three, and four proportions.*

19. As in this manner four substances combined in dif-
ferent proportions yield twenty-four perfumes, so too the
other tetrads. Hence the sum will be ninety-six.

20. If a quantity of sixteen substances is varied in four

. different ways, the result will be a number of 1820.

21. Since this quantity combined in four ways admits of

प्रथमपङ्कौ बनादीनि चलारि। दितीयय्ामु्ीरादीनि । वुतीयस्वा-
अनुवादीभि । चतुधा धानकादीनि । यदुक्त “ सेच्छापरिवर्तितखतु-
भिंरतः। एकददिषिचतुर्भिमानिर्बन्धा्यवो भवति ” तच भेदाः प्रदाने
अथाकरमेय सवेषां प्रलयेकद्ध बद्व दाः सवन्ति। चतुष्कल् चतुर्वि्रति-
रिति (*= ५. 15 ५१) । तवचा वनद्धेवभागः। वालकद्व दी मायौ ।
शचेवकस्छ अथो भागाः । क्रष् चत्वारः । एको मन्यः ॥ aay
भानः । वालक दरौ । भ्रैजेयक्ड चलारः। कुर चयः। दितीयो
अन्दः ॥ वगदेको भागः । वालक चयः । श्ैकेयकय्छ ठौ । कचुरष्ठ
अलारः। तुतोयौ बन्धः and v0 forth.

Reed wx. . ५

* CL. foregoing note.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 307] =====
tates a compound for perfumes, eto.

26. Let the same be blended with Nakhi, Tabernaemon-
tana and olibanum; revive the fragrance by nutmeg, camphor
and musk; famigate with sugar and Nakhi. In this way
are made scents called Sarvatobhadra (i.e, “ good for all
use ”,

27. Many perfumes for the mouth * are prepared from a
collection of four substances among the fore-mentioned, per-

tana, egallochum, cyperus-grass, fragrant Priyangn, Cessis-
bark * and yellow myrobalan ; Permute and vary them three

न ध्वम of st. 29 (recurring in Bph. Jitaks, 13, 6) ts
wocia clit ‘ithoat the eoploas commentary and some dlagremy, i
would be hardly intelligible. The explanstion also is foand ia the
Printed edition of the Brh. Jataka, ,

“ ८०, पारिवाताः पारिजातसद्गन्वा सुखवाखा wafer |

* Reading and readering doubtfal. ‘The Comm, paraphrases the
word by peripeleve. Bat, this being the same with mustd, ls wholly
out of question, because we find mas/é in the same line. As wean b

` ००२०५ by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 308] =====
by three in a receptacle of nine compartments ; join to each
compound one proportion of sandal, one of olibanum, one-
half of Nakhi and one-fourth of anise; fumigate with
hellebore (P), vermilion and sugar. In this manner are pre-
pared eighty-four perfumes for the hair.

81. (To perfume) tooth sticks used for brushes, put them
for a week into cowstale mixed with yellow myrobalan, and
again into scent-wator.

32, 33. This scent-water is to be prepared from small carda-
mums, Cassia-bark, Tamila-leaf, antimony, honey, pepper,
Mesua and costus. Keep the tooth sticks for a while! in it;
then powder them with a mixture of four proportions of ©
nutmeg, two of Tamila-leaf, one of small cardamums, and
three of camphor, and let them dry in the sun’s rays.

34. Tooth sticks (so prepared) will procure to him who

* uses them, freshness of colour, brightness of the face, purity

and fragrance to the mouth, and an agreeable voice.
35. Betel stimulates love, sets off the countenance, in-
gratiates, gives fragrance to the mouth, is toniv, quells

phlegmatic diseases, and is producive of yet other advantages.

36. Used with a moderate dose of lime, it gives colour;
with too excessive a dose of areca-nut, it destroys colour ; |
with too much lime, it gives a bad smell to the mouth, but
when the betel-leaf predominates, a pleasant smell.

87. At night a quid of betel is salutary, if it consists
chiefly of leaf, and at day-time, if it is mixed with lime;

` to apply betel in any other fashion than those here prescribed

is a mere abuse of it. When the fragrance of betel is en-
hanced by Kakkola, Areca, Averrhoa and Erythrine,* it
awakens the joys of amorous intoxication.

. @ne of the terms for water, and any word for water denotes Andropogon

echoenanthes (Arfoera), it is possible that our author, if he really wrote
wane, meant Arfvers. ॥

" Half a day, says Utpala.

3 The ०००००. (०५४९७ पारिजात ५ ००८५० जातीफल, ००० ०५००६ लवच्ी-
फल ५० ००7०: खवङ्खपुष्यं तस्व फलासग्मवात्‌ ० ००७००७७ wrong, for whe
would say phala instead of pushpe? As to périjdte, the author may
have meant “sceats for the mouth” in general.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 309] =====
“ ॐ व

Onarren LXXVIII, ।
Union of Man and Wye.

1. Tradition says that Viddraths was killed by his own
aneen with @ weapon conosaled in her plaited hair, and the
king of Kagi- " by his disaffeo ted queen through means
of an ankle-ring smeared with poison.*

' काशीराजम्‌ is an erratum for wrfiqe,
* Uspala quotes from KAmandakl a passage, which in the Calcates

खदत्तदसनां
महि देवीगृहं यच्छेदाव्मीययम्निषे्नात्‌ ।
-अत्वमवद्मो.पीह fireat eity न त्रचेत्‌ ॥
देवीगहमतो शाता भद्रधेनममारथत्‌ ।

व व, कोण ज यम of paryati (drs, darpenem, etc.),
meaning “to receive one’s visit:” On the other hand, we have to read

with the Cale od. हेवीनुहगतं ०० शव्यान्तरे खगः. I am doubtfal
Shont STR MTT and WyWATH, but judge them preferable, as they
harmonize with the tenor of the whole which tends te incul-
cate the necessity of being suspicious, Te may be noticed that Ka.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 310] =====
„ 808

2. Bo do disaffected wives occasion deadly mischief: why »
need we mention other examples? Thegefore, let men care-
fally try whether their wives are affected or disaffected.

3. Affectionateness springing from amorous passion is
‘ indicated by expressions of feeling, by showing the navel,
arms, bosom, ornaments, by tightening the garments, by
untying the plaited hair, by twitches and tremblings of the
eyebrows, by side-glances. ॥

4. (Other tokens of affection are:) in her husband’
presence, she will spit with noise, laugh loud, rise up from
couch or seat, have slight convulsions and yawn, ask little —
for things easily to be had, fondle and kiss her child; when
he has turned his face, she will look at her female companion,
follow him with the eye, mention his virtues, scratch her ear.

5. You may hold that she, also, is affectionately disposed
who talks kindly, shares her wealth, gladdens at secing her
husband, and, forgetting her anger, wipes out any fault of
his by extolling his good parts.

6. She will honour his friends, hate his enemies; be
grateful, feel sad at his absence; offer him her breast and
lips, clasp him in her arms, sweat, and be the first to apply a
kiss.

7. The gesture of a disaffected wife is frowning the
_ brows, turning away the face, ingratitude, want of eagerness,
fretfalness, kindness towards her husband’s enemica, and —
harsh language.’

8. On touching or beholding him, she shudders; plays
the proud part; tries not to retain him when he is going;
receiving»a kiss, she wipes her mouth ; she rises the last, and
sleeps the first.

. 9, Buddhistio nurs, female ascetics, handmaids, nurses,
errand-girls, laundresses, flower-sellers, vile women, female
ions, barbers’ wives, serve as go-betweens.

10. As go-betweens occasion the ruin of respectable
families, one should carefully keep any wife from them,
that the reputation and honour of the family may increase.

+ Ch, Raja-tarangigl il. 603, aqq.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 311] =====
U1. Nostural walls, vigils, protendod sicko, visits to

12, A loving wife will, at firet,* show no desire, and will
not leave off the amorous chat, though somewhat abeshed
and drooping. In the midst of the action she will be devoid
of shame, and, on the close, bashfully drop her face, Then,
again, she will show various expressions of sentiment, and,

’ perceiving the humour of her husband, attentively ao-
commodate herself to him in movements indicative of weari-
ness or otherwise.

18. Good qualities in & wife are youth, beauty, fashionable
dress, genteelness, discreetness, sprightliness, and soon. If
they are possessed of good qualities, they are called “jewels
of wives,” whereas others, for an intelligent man, are
“ nuisances,”

14. A wife, when in privacy with her husband, should not

" ८०००. तथाच काश्चपः ॑
दुषय्घरता या तु सा पिपर गाशयेत्कृशम्‌
तीर्थयाभारन भेदो परवेश्मखमागमः॥
देवाखये राच्यरभं परखरणिवासिभिः। `
पितृवेश्मनि वा(च न शेयः खामिना विना ॥
घृतकुभरोपमा भारी पुश्वो वह्िवर्च॑सा ।
संवेषाद्रवते कुम्दत्खी पुंसि भाविता ॥
निजने तु विविद या सरी पुशवमीषते ।
तस््ाः प्रसिते गुह्यमगुयाञ्चच्छयान्विता ॥

The third stanza has been received into Vetlla-pancavingati and ether
works (see Bohtlingk, Ind. Spriiche, 2217), with many corruptions and
unsuccessful attempts to restore the true reading. The neater gender
of GT Is vouched by unimpeachable authorities, and asin the Dict..
of B. and R. it is distinctly noticed that the neuter ofsam has net, as
yet, been discovered, it is worth while to remark that it occurs in the
" ८००." प्रथममेव प्रयने पतिता सुरतं नेच्छति

न by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 312] =====
310

be smutty, not talk in boorish terms, not speak of unseemly ,
parts of the body, nor mention other,business, for it is in
the mind that Love takes his origin.

16. Sending forth her breath equally with her husband,
ready to offer him her arm for a pillow and her breasts, the
hair scented and the amorous desire soon aroused, she goes
to alumber after he has fallen asleep and awakes before him.

16. Avoid ill-tempered females, and such as are impatient
in times of pressure. Nor are those approved whose blood
is dark, blue, yellow or slightly copper-red.

17, 18. A woman that is sleepy, has too much blood and
bile, is vexed with the whites, of a rheumatic and phlegmatic `
constitution, gluttonous, sweaty, with deformed limbs, short-
haired and with (prematurely) grey hairs ; farther, one whose
flesh is not solid, who is paunch-bellied and lisping ; besides,
those who in the chapter on the signs of women have been
declared wicked: with any such should a man not play the
sport of love.

19. The menstrual blood is sound if {t is tinged like hare’s
blood or similar to lac, and fades after washing.!

20. Such blood not attended with noise and pain, and
ceasing to flow after three days, will unquestionably, subse-
quently to coition, develope into an embryo.

21. Let a woman during those three days not indulge in

. bathing, wearin wreaths, and anointing the body, and let
her bathe* on the fourth day according to the injunction pre-~
scribed in a work of authority.

22, Let her use for her bath the herbs enumerated in the
chapter on the Inauguration ceremony (Ch. xtvuu.), mixed
with water; on the same occasion the prayer there taught
will serve.

"28. In the even nights, 00 they say, males are procreated ;
in the odd ones, females ;* in the even nights, each fourth
night‘ omitted, long-lived, handsome and lucky males.

* Cl. Sucrate, I. p. 315, * Cf. Sacrata, I. p. 316.

® CE. Gucruta, Lp. 321. -

* Comm.: GAY WAST Ue wafrert |

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 313] =====
25. Let a man have sexual intercourse with his wife when
the central houses (७.०५. ४७ 1४, 4६४, 7th and 10th) are occu-
pied by benign planots; when the Moon is stationed in the
first house and in Conjunction with good planets; when the
malign planets Occupy the third, eleventh, sixth houses, or
when the constellations are of a kind to portend the birth of
sons,

26. During the space of time fit for coition should a man:
by no means hurt his wife with nails or teeth. The fit time
for coition is sixteen days, but in the first three nights he

had better have no intercourse with her.

_O

Cuarrer LXXIX.
Signs of Couches and Seate,

, 1. T am going to tell the sigus of couches and seats,
because this science will constantly be of use to everybody, and
especially to kings.

2. Good trees (for beds and seats) are Asan, Dalbergia,
sandal-tree, yellow sandal-tree, Deodar, ebony, Sal, Gmelins,
Morunga, Padmaka, Tectons and Sissu.

3, 4. Unfit are trees overthrown by thunderstrokes, water,
wind; those in which bees and birds have taken up their

abode ; those growing on a hallowed spot, cemetery, road, or * ~

being sear at the top, and entwined with creepers ; or spinous
trees, those growing at the'confluence of Great rivers or near
temples, and such as have fallen down in south-western
direction. ,

वधय ण
Peril, expenses, quarrels and all sorts of misfortunes arias.
6. Or should the timber have been hewn formerly, then

नि by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 314] =====
312

it behoves to be examined at the time the work is taken in
hand. If a little lad climb upon the dimber, it will procure
eons and cattle.

7. You may deem it a lucky token, if at the beginning
of the work you happen to see white blossoms, a rutting
elephant, curdled milk, barley-corns, filled water-jare, gems,
and other auspicious things.

8. A digit, as used in workmanship, is equal to eight
barley-corns deprived of the husks and laid in such a way
that they touch each other on the swelling part. A bed of

the greatest length, amounting to a hundred digits, is fit for

kings and promises victory.

9. Couches of ninety, eighty-four, seventy-eight, and
seventy-two-digits are fit for princes, ministers, army com-
manders and court-priests, successively.

10. The width is, after the prescript of Vicvakarman, one-
eighth less than half the length.! The height of the legs,
with swelling part and top included, is equal to one-third of
the length of the couch.

11. A couch constructed wholly of Gmelina, will bestow
riches; one of Asan, removes sickness; one of the hardest
ebony, gives wealth.

12. One exclusively fabricated from Sissu, promotes well
being in many ways; one of sandal-wood, repels enemies and
promotes virtue, renown and long life.

18. A couch of Padmaka secures longevity, fortune,”

learning and wealth; one made of Sél timber, produces
happiness; so does one of Tectona.

14. A monarch who reposes upon a couch constructed
exclusively of sandal-wood and decked with gold, studded
. With variegated gems, will be honoured by the very gods.

16. Ebony and Sissu produce no good effects, if joined
with other wood; nor do Gmelins, Deodar, and Asan.

16. Tectona and Sal, however, bring luck, whether com-
bined or separate. Likewise yellow sandal and Nauclea are
lucky, whether single or united.

* Taken roughly, eg. the width of a royal couch will be equal to
W—¥ = nearly 43.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 315] =====
818

17, A couch*made wholly of Dalbergia is not favourable,
aust one of tamarind-wood is destructive of life Asan
being joined with other timber, will soon Produce many
evils, ध

18. The legs may be made from tamarind-wood, Tectona
and eandal-wood, but the best from Tectona. Couches and

formerly acquired. .
23. 1 some figure showing like a female turns up, rishes
will be lost ; if it be a vase, a son will be born, A water-pot

indicates the gotting of च hidden treamre, and anol fn

24, Figures of lizards,-monkeys, auakes, portend famine,
sickness, oppression by a foe; forms like valtures, owls, rooks
or hawks, bode pestilence.

25. If the figure resembles « noose or hondlees trunk, the
sovereign will die; if blood is cozing, calamity befalls the
. People. Xr the out be black, grey, rough and bad-amelling,
disaster is near, .

26. A white, even, good-smelling and sleek out will bring
luck. The being suspicious or inauspicious of the cuts,
produces corresponding effects to the couches,

"27. According to the Precept of the masters, one ought,
in fitting the sidebeams, to lay the points of the beams f

Digitized by Google

भ.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 316] =====
314

direction from left to right.! If they be laid contrariwise,
or all turned to one direction, thdfe will be danger from
Spirits.

28. Where one leg* stands topsy-turvy, there will the
owner’s foot get crippled; where two legs are in the same
predicament, food remains indigested; where there are three
or four in such a condition, will be misery, death and
captivity.

29. If there is a hollow or discoloured spot in the upper
part of the leg, it portends sickness; a knob on the swelling
part of the leg threatens disease of the belly. .

30. Beneath the swelling part is the lower leg, a knob in
which causes unsafety. There below is the base; a knob in
this place will occasion the ruin of goods.

81. A knob at the hoof (so called) will, it is declared,
cause distress to hoofed animals, Inauspicious also is a knob
occurring at a third of the whole length of the sidebeams
and croasbeams. .

82. The different sorts of flaws in tho wood may be summed
up in the following nomenclature: cavity, boar’s eye, hog’s
eye, calf’s navel, freckle and Dhundhuka.*

38. The flaw called cavity looks like s waterpot, hollow
in the middle and narrow at the mouth; the other termed
boar’s eye is as Jarge as s Catjang-pea and blackish.

_ 84. The “hog’s eye” is distinguished by being rough,
discoloured, and by extending over one knot and a half.
The “calfs navel” is a fissure running from right to left,
and extending over one knot.

35. The defect termed freckle is black, and the Dhundhuka
isacleft. If & faulty spot shows the same colour with the

. rest of the wood, it is pronounced to be not so very bad.

36. The defect going by the name of cavity causes loss of
property; the boar’s eye, ruin to the family ; the hog’s eye,
danger from the sword; the calf’s navel, danger from sickness.

* Le. im a direction following the course of the sun.

* Le. euppert of the couch. ॥

* The true form of this word is uncertain; cf. var. readiogs.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 317] =====
$8. A couch made from one kind of good timber will be
lucky; yet more lucky one of wood of two trees; one con-
structed from three promotes the well-being of one’s children;

of trees will lose his life on it A couch made from the ”

_ es

Owarrzr LXXX.
Trying of Diamonds,
1. A good jewel insures to kings good luck ; 8 bad one,

disaster. * Hence let connoisseurs‘ examine Destiny as con.
nected with jewels.

stones, t.¢. diamonds and the rest. ॥

8. Some say that goms owe their birth to Bala, the demon;
as others tell, to Dadhica, Others still touch that the variety
of precious stones is a result of earth’s nature.)

4, 6. (The most common gems are:) diamond, sapphire,
emerald, agate, ruby, bloodstone, beryl, amethyst, Vimalaks,
Quarts (P), crystal, moongem, sulphur hued gem (P), opal, °
‘conch, agure-stone, topas, Brahma-stone, Tyottrass, - chry-
solite (P), pearl, and coral. _ ,

6. The diamond found on the bank of the Vens is quite
pure; that from the Kopals-oountry is tinged like Bilan
blossom ; the Surashtrian diamond is somewhat Copper-red ;
that from Supara, sable. `

7. The diamond from the HimAlaya is slightly copper.

CL. also Atharva-Veda, Wv. 10,

न by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 318] =====
316

coloured; the sort derived from Matanga' shows the hue of -

wheat-blossom; that from Kalinga is yellowish, and from
Pupdrs, grey.

8. A hexagonal, white diamond, is consecrated to Indra
a dark one, of the shape of a snake’s mouth, to Yama; one
hued like a plantain stalk, of any shape, to Vishnu.

9. A diamond of the shape of a female pudendum and
hued like the flower of Pterospermum, will be Varuna’s; a

tzigonal one, of the colour of a tiger’s eye, is consecrated to |

Agni.
10. A diamond having the form of a barley-corn and the
hue of Acoka-blossom, is declared to be Vayu’s. Diamonds-

are found in three different ways: in rivers, in mines, and

sporadic. .

11. A red or yellow diamond is fit for Kshatriyas; a white
one, for Brahmans; one of the hue of Sirisa-flower, for
‘Vaigyas; whereas a diamond of the dark tinge of a sword is
deemed good for Cidras.

12, 18. Eight seeds of white mustard make one grain.
The price of a diamond weighing twenty grains is two lakhs
(200,000) Karshas silver; a diamond weighing eighteen
grains is worth two lakhs lessened by } (i.e. 150,000) Karshas
silver; weight sixteen grains, price twenty lakhs—} (i.e.
133,8333) ; weight fourteen grains, price 100,000; weight
twelve grains, price 66,6663; weight ten grains, price 40,000
weight eight grains, price 12,500; weight six grains, price
8000; weight four grains, price 2000; weight two grains,
price 200 Karshas of silver.

14. A diamond is said to be beneficial (to the owner), if it
cannot be pierced by any other substance, is light, cleaves
through water like a ray, shows glossy and similar to light-
ning, fire, or the rainbow.

15. Diamonds that show scratches like crowfeet, flies, or
hairs, are mixed with coloured mineral substances or gravel,
have double facets, are smeared, tarnished, dull* or perforated,

" According to Utpala: HAYRUTYT |
* 0०००. ; चतं विजतकान्ि ।

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 319] =====
817

16. Likewise such as aro covered with bubbles, split at the
points, flattened, or oblong like the fruit of Gendarussa. The

——=
॥ .%(4 ^^

Ouarrzn LXXXI. Cy.

Trying of Pearls,

1. Pearls come from elephants, snakes, oysters, conch-
shells, clouds, bamboo, dolphins, and ‘boars. Out of these
the pearl from oysters is by far the best, ~

2. The latter is produced in eight places, vis, Ceylon,
Paraloka,* Surdshtra, Tamraparni, Persia, the North country,
Pandya district, and Himilaya. .

8. The pearls coming from Ceylon are many-shaped,
glossy, swan-white, large; those from Tamraparnt are white
"With a slight red tings, bright,

4. The pearls from Paraloka are blackish, white or yellow,

mingled with gravel, not smooth; those from Surishtra =

neither big nor too small, and hued like fresh butter.

6. The Persian Pearls are brilliant, clear, heavy, and
extremely valuable. The Himalayan pearl is light, hollow,
coloured like curdled milk, big, of various shapes.’

6. That from the North country ia rough, black or white

oe sam tae ripe to mean» angle: Ff: yh aR, he
may be right, . -

क काः भणण ७ पक च ५.०६ ग्न 9,
in Ramayaya, iv. 40, 29, ° २० ॥

Digitized by Google

|

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 320] =====
॥

318

light of good sise and brilianey. Pearls from the Pandys ,
district are like Nim-leaf, ‘Triputa grains, or coriander-seed,

it.
7, 8 A pearl, dark-tinged Like flax-blossom, is conseorated
to Vishnu; one like the moon, to Indra; one having the
hue of orpiment, to Varuna; a sable one, to Yama; one red
like a ripe pomegranate’s kernels or Abrus-berry, must be
attributed to Vayu; one resembling smokeless fire or red

lotus, to Agni.
9. The price set down for a single pearl of good lustre
nd quality, weighing four Mishakas, is 5900 Karshes

silver.

10. The prices for pearls weighing 34, 3, 24,2, 14 Mashakas,
saccessively, Bre; 8200; 2000; 1800; 800; 353 K. silver. .

11. A single pearl, having the weight of 1 Mashaka, may
fetch 185 H,, « single pearl weighing 4 Rettis! is worth
90 K.; one of 3} Rettis, is worth 70 K. silver.

12. The price of a single pearl of good quality, weighing
8 Rettin, comes to 50 silver pioces (i. Karshas); that of one
weighing 2} Rettis, oomes to 35 silver piooes.

ie cthe tenth part of a Pala is equal to 1 Dharans. If
thirteen nioe pearla together fetch the weight of 1 Dharens,

14, 15, 16. Sixteen pearls to one Dharapa are worth 200;
twenty p-» 170; twenty-five p., 180; thirty p., 70; forty Pp»
50; sixty or fifty-five ए. 40; eighty p.. 30; & hundred ©
pearls, 26; two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, five
Pend yoarla, weighing together one Dharaps, are worth,
gucoessively: 12; 6; 5; 8 silver pieces.

The terms to denote a collection of thirteen pearls that

- toyotbor make wp the weight of one Dharans, is Pils ©
toerirtion of sixteen, Pioos ; and oo in succession are ool'se”

denominated Ardhs, Ravaks, and Nigara.
Right ty, and oo forth, are called poarl-dust,
18, The price above for collections weighing one

+ ०५ Rett (gunit brsbpale) = + Miahaka

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 321] =====
319

Dharana applies to the case of pearls of good quality, and is
to be lowered for such as are of inferior quality. The value
of quantities intermediate between the enumerated terms
must be calculated proportional

19. When pearls look black, whitish, yellowish, copper-red,

_ somewhat rough, they are worth less by one-half; when
considerably rough, their value is diminished by one-sixth;
and when quite yellow, by one-half.

` 20, 21. The tale goes that there are pearls engendered in
the frontal globes and the hollow of the tusks of elephants
from the family of Airdvata at (the Moon’s conjunction with)

Pushya, Gravana, on Sundays and Mondays, and of the

happy elephants born during the Sun’s northern course at

an eclipse of: Sun or Moon. They are abundant (it is told),
of big size, of various shapes, and splendid.

22. Those are beyond any estimate, and should not be
perforated, baing too splendid. When worn by kings, they
will prove highly purifying, and bestow children, triumph
and good health.

23. At the root of boars’ tusks there is (it is told) a pearl
of great value, lustrous like moonshine. The pearl coming
from dolphins resembles a fish’s eye, is highly purifying and
of great worth.

24. It is also affirmed that pearl is produced in the
manner of hailstones, and dropped from the seventh (i¢..

' highest) region of wind, where celestial beings took it from

the sky. The pearl springing from the clouds is lightning-
like,

26. The snakes of the lineage of Takshaka and Vasuki,
and the snakes roaming at will' have bright, blue-tinged
pearls in their hoods,

26. If the Rain-god, on a sudden, drops something on a

" These snakes are, of course, the clouds, and their pearls the rain
and dewdrops. Whether our author understood the mythological
phrases be borrowed, is not quite clear; but this much is certain, that
he distinctly intimates the mythical character-of the tales about saake
pearis, ete., for he says kila. .

३4

नि by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 322] =====
320

blessed spot of the earth, and into a silver vessel, one may ,
regard it to be s pea¥l coming from the snakes.

27. The inestimable snake pearl, when worn by kings,
dispels misfortune, destroys enemics, propagates renown and
bestows victory.

28. You may know a pearl to originate from bamboo by
its being flat, coarse, and coloured like camphor or crystal.
The pearl produced from the conch-shell shows a moonlike
hue, is round, glittering, and clear.

29. Pearls from conch-shells, dolphins, bamboo, elephants,
boars, snakes and clouds may not be perforated, and as they
are of immense value, no price has been fixed upon by the ©
authorities.

30. All these pearls are of great worth, procure to monarchs
eons, wealth, popularity, renown ; dispel sickness and sorrow,
and give them what they desire and like.

31. A pearl chain, composed of 1008 strings and four
cubits long, is an ornament of the gods, and termed Indra-
ochanda (i.c. Indra’s pleasure). Half fhe former in measure
is the Vijayacchanda (i.e. the pleasure of Indra’s grand-
eon).

32. A chain of 108 strings is styled a pearl collar; one of
81 is a Devacchanda (i.e. the pleasure of gods). A half-
collar has 64 strings, and a Ragmikalapa (i.e. radiant zone)
has 64.

‘88. A garland is composed of 32 strings; a helf-garland, `
of 20; a Manavaka of 16; a half-Manavaka of 12.

34. The chain called Mandara consists of 8 strings; the
Hiaraphalaka (i.c. plat collar) of 5 strings. A necklace of
one cubit’s length, and containing twenty-seven pearls, is

. Damed a Star-cluster.

35. They call the latter a Gem-ladder, when it has precious
stones or small balls inserted, and a Catukira (i.¢. coaxer),
when it has a brooch in the middle.

36. A so-called single string may contain any number of
pearls, is one cubit long, and has no gem; but if it is joined
with a gem in the middle, it is termed a Stake by the
connoisseurs of ornature.

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 323] =====
` श

0 ^ साह LXXXII,
Trying of Rubies.

mony, lotus, rose-apple, or myrrh.
2. Those which Proceed from cinnabar (or black salt) are
- Brey, of a pale lustre, and mixed with mineral substances ;
those coming from crystal are lustrous, vari-coloured and pure,
8. Smooth, brilliant on the surface, very pure, sparkling,
heavy, of nice shape, brilliant within, high-coloured,?—euch

and mixed with grit.

5. They affirm that in the head of enakes there is a gem,
hued like a bee or Peacock’s tail, and shining like the flame .
of lamp. Such s one may be considered of inestimable value.

6. The sovereign who shall Wear it, shall never receive
injury from poison or illness; in his domain abundant rain
is always poured by the Rain-god, and he annihilates his
enemies by the power of that gem.

7. The price of a single raby weighing a pala (=4 karshas)

8. A single ruby, having the weight of half 9 pala, is
valued at 12,000 P.s.; wéighing one darsha, at 6000 p. «.;
one of eight Rettis’ weight, at 3000. ^

~ 9. One having the weight of four Rettis may be bought
for 1000, and one of two Rettis costs 500 « pieces. The
Price of rubies of intermediate weight must be calculated

Or black salt. * Read ia the ध्यः गाज.

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 324] =====
322 0

proportionally, and dh regard to their being of inferior F ९...
superior quality.

10. A stone deficient in colour fetches half the (usual)
price; one lcking briliancy, an cighth perts ono THY St
good and many bed qualities, fetches one-twentieth of the
standard price.

nerd Pome somewhat dusky, with many flaws and few
good qualities, will fetch 543° Buch is the price of rubies,
as stated by the ancient masters.

_

OnaPTER १९९११११
Trying of Emeralds.

1, An emerald’ of the hue of parrots, bamboo-leaves,
plantain or Birisa-blossom, and of good quality, is extremely
beneficial to every man, when worn at ceremonies in honour
of the gods or Fathers. . ‘

_

CHAPTER LXXXIV.

Symptoms of Lamps.

1. A light turned leftwards, showing dull rays, sputtering ~
sparks, of little bulk, going out econ, although furnished with
pare oil and wick, crackling and quivering, forebodes evil
consequences. Not less 00, when it has a diffused flame, and

extinguished without the agency of grasshoppers oF wind.

2. A light of compact form, long-sized, quiet, glaring,

* noiseless, clear, turned rightwards, of the lustre of beryl or
gold, reveals speedy luck ; likewise when it shines long® end
sprightly. The other symptoms resemble thoee of fire, and
apply mutatis mutandis.

४ कूच iret syllable of HCA has been lost io printing.
2 ‘The translation follows the var. reading Gfat-

ष ^

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 325] =====
Onartzr LXXXV.
Tokens of Tooth Sticke.
1. Sticks for cleansing the teeth may be made from thou-

sands of sorts of creepers, spreading plants, shrubs and trees,!
and one might (if needed) expound the effects of them seve-

‘rally; but in order not to delay too long by doing so, I

will only tell the favourable consequences.

2. Let no one use for tooth sticks twigs of an untried
sort of wood, nor twigs with leaves, or with an even number
of knots, or such as are split, sear at the top, or devoid of
bark.

3. From Flacourtia, Bilva, and Gmelina (being used) is
to be expected Brahminical illustriousness ; from the Kshema-
tree, a good wife; from the Indian fig-tree, prosperity ; from
Calotropis, much splendour; from Bassia, sons; from Ter-
minalia Arjuna, popularity.

4. Fortune is (insured) by the use of Sirisa and Pongamia
much-desired success by the waved-leaved fig-tree. By the
use of jessamine-wood one becomes honoured with the
people; the use of Pipal, they say, is attended with emi-
nence.

5. Good health may be expected from Jujube and Solanum ;
increase of dominion from Acacia and Bilva; desired goods
from Dalbergia ; ditto from Nauclea.

6, Azadiracht procures acquisition of wealth ; and Oleander,
getting of food; the Indian fig-tree, abundant food. He
who uses Sami and Terminalia Arjuna, dispels his enemies ;
Echites also tends to the destruction of foes. ¢ ,

7. Dignity, they say, will result from the use of Sal and
Acvakarps,? as well as of Deodar and Gendarusa. By
(using the wood of) fragrant Priyangu, Achyranthes, rose-

" Cf. Sucrota, ii. 185, 999. a
® Bala and Acvakarpa are generally takén to be synonymous.

,
é

Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 326] =====
824 > ४५.1१4

| . pple and pomegranate, one will become a favourite with |

everybody, =  ¥

8. Let one after treasuring up any wish whatsoever in
his heart for a year, use an irreproachable tooth stick, seated
at his ease, with the face turned northward or eastward, and
let him after cleansing leave the stick in pure place.
† 9. A tooth stick falling towards you, and'in a tranquil!
, quarter of the horizon, is favourable; it is particularly good
if it occupies an elevated place. The reverse is declared
mischievous, whereas it announces dainty food, if it stands
one instant, and immediately after falls. ~

ke, met scorched by the sun.

  
 

ew

ite mata Soe Hie vot cons
! ) ^

0१५०८९८८ Sy wok

1 64.140 ..44 /४24- 5

 

33 a

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 327] =====
Digitized by Google

===== [brihat-samhita-1877 | PDF page 328] =====
LINGUISTIC PUBLICATION 8

TRUBNER & ©0., |
8 amp 60, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.

 

fren गाम भरस्व रूपमधिकं प्रच्छद्रमुप्तं घन

विवा भोगकरी यशःसुखकरी विदा गुरूणा गुडः ।
विया बन्धुजनो विरेश्ममने विया परं श्वतं

विदा राजसु पूजिता ग हि धनं विद्याविहीनः पभुः ॥

Messus. TRUBNER & Co. respectfully solicit ordors for all classes of
Publications connected with the History, Antiquities, Geography, and
Languages of the East, pnblished abroad. Mesers. Triisyzrn & Co. have
established agencies in all parts of the East, of Europe, and America, and
are thus enabled to furnish such publications with as little delay as possible,
and at prices below the hitherto customary charges.

Authors desirous of printing their own books may be furnished with
Specimens, and Estimates for Paper, Printing, and Binding, and every
facility will be afforded them, if works are intended for publication, of
bringing the same advantageously before the public. ॥

 

 

Alcock.—A Practica Grawwan of the Jarawzsz Laxovacs. By Sir
Rururarozn Axcock, Resident British Minister at Jeddo. 4to., pp. 61, sewed. 18s.

Alcock—Famittan Draroovrs in Japanese, with English and French
. Translations, for the Use of Students. By Sir Rurmxaronp ALcocx. 8vo., pp. viii-
and 40, sewed. Paris and London, 1863. be.

Benfey.—A Practica Gramuaz or ror Saxexart Laxavios, for the Use
fs aie 1 By Turopors Bexrsy, ee व on fae im the
niversity of Guttingen, etc. ete, Second Bdition, carefs ५ corrected.
. Royal &v0., pp. xviii. and 296, cloth. 102. 6d. न #

Goldstiicker.—A Dicrioxany, Saxoxarr axp Exotisy, extended and im-
ण from the Second Edition of the Dictionary of Professor’ H.‘H. Wizson, with
नवनव" व mt, Grammatical Appendices
an sorving as a Sans! {English "7 ‘uzopor GoLpsTiicnEs

Parts I. wi ४1, 4०. 1856—1864, h Part 6s, न

