Jatakachundrika (1900) - B. Suryanarain Row
Translator: B. Suryanarain Row | Coverage: complete; annotated translation with worked charts
Cite as (slug, PDF page). Verify against the page image before trusting a rule.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 1] =====


===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 2] =====


===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 3] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA

OR

Moonlight to Agtgology:
ENGLISH TRANSLATION

WITH ORIGINAL TEXT IN DEVANAGARI AND COPIOUS
NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS,

BY
B. SURYANARAIN ROW, B.A., M.R.AS.,
Member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.

Editor of the Astrological Magazine, Translator of Sarwar-
thachintamant, author of The Astrological Self-Instructor,
The Astrological Primer, The Revival of Astrology,
The Compendium of Astrology, Vikari Prospects,
Astrological Lectures, The “ Next Ten Years,”
efc., ete,

SECOND EDITION.

THOROUGHLY REVISED.

aS

Madras:
Printep at THE RoyaL Victoria Press,
BY K. KRISHNASWAMI AIYAR, B.A.

1900.
Price per Copy, 1 Re. Postage 4 As.

I.
| All Rights Reserved

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 4] =====
96; ९ -? zero. 6.2

HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY
DEXTER FUND
नदो ०

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 5] =====
INTRODUCTION.

 

a is a handy pamphlet in sanskrit and
signifies “Moonlight for Astrological sciences.” It is a
work of great ewggestivencss and contains really valuable
information necessary for a beginner. Adepts in Astrolo-
gy have much food for reficotion here. ‘Prefatory remarks
reconciling the principles of Astrology with those of the
modern sciences will be out of place in a work of English
translation and I would strongly recommend the readers
to secure « odpy of my Astrological Self Instructor and
read the splendid scientific Introduction elaborately given
by me there. They will be largely benefitted. English
translations of sanskrit works, are always poor perfor-
mances as the spirit and beauty of the original language oan
never be adequately represented in the English tongue.
Still attempts made in this direction ought not to be des-
pised as they tend to give the readers in English some idea,
of the contents which, the sanskrit book treats of. The
Bnglish translation of jatakachundrika has already been
published completely in the Astrological Magazine, Vols,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 6] =====
ii INTRODUCTION.

1 and II and those who go in for those volumes will find
this and many other important subjects treated of there.
The notes and illustrations given in the Astrological Maga-
zine have been carefully collected and valuable additions
have been made here with a view to make them complete.
The Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn
are exercising influences on the Earth and all its phenomena’
and this has been thoroughly demonstrated by the argu-
ments adduced by me in the columns of the Astrological
Magazine. Without light and heat nothing could exist on
this world even for a second and they both come directly
from the Sun and indirectly through the reflection of the
other planetary bodies. We have only to stand for a few
hours in the Sun to feel that we are influenced by his ever
activerays. All the planets shine by borrowed light—from
the Sun. The Sunis the accredited head of the whole
planetary system and without his energy nothing can live
on this Earth. The Earth itself is maintained in its due
position by the attraction of the solar rays, and is wholly
influenced by them. The terrestrial phenomena can have no
other apparent source from which they can borrow their
Vitality. If the planetary influences are admitted as mould-
ing the flora and the fauna of a country there will be no
consistency in saying that astrology is false, and that a
knowledge of the working of these influences is useless.
Astrological works were originally composed by the great
Maharishis, Vasista, Parasara, Vyasa, Gargi, Marichi, Attri,
and Jaimini. They were persons endowed: with the Devya
Drishti (superior sight). These had no special motives to
pass off a series of facts known to them to be utterly. false. —
Such a position is untenable even for a single minute if we
learnt how great men the Rishis were. I shall not argue
‘the pros and cons about Astrology. The easiest way of

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 7] =====
INTRODUCTION. . ॐ

Convincing oneself about the truths of astrology will be to
study the elementary principles of the science and then
judge whether they are worthy of devotion or not. All
Bciences require some application, average intelligence, and
great perseverance. They can only be judged after some
progress. Here the same course is precisely recommended.
If the results are not convincing after a fair trial has been
given to it the science may be neglected as it deserves to
be. No science shouid be rejected off hand without: a fair
investigation into its principles. I may however give the
educated public an assurance—from my long personal
acquaintance with the subject, extending over twenty
years—that when people take to the study of the subject
of astrology without any bias, they are sure to find valu-
able truths in it, which will be highly useful to them in
their transactions in life. The time they may be required
to spend over the astrological studies will be amply re-
munerated by the intellectual treat they have there and
the certain knowledge of the future which they will be
able to secure. To the Hindu a knowledge of astrology
is simply invaluable. His aims are higher and all his acts
are regulated with reference to the existence of a nobler
life in future. A knowledge of the future can never be
despised and remedies taken to improve our present con-
dition in the light of such knowledge, will be highly useful
in our practical life. The author of Jatakachundrika, as
well as other authors, presupposes some knowledge in the
student, and proceeds upon principles well recognised by
the Astrological writers. There are 12 Zodiacal signs, 27
constellations divided into 4 (Padams) quarters each, nine
" planets and the complications arising therefrom. The Sun,
Venus, and Mercury roughly move in each sign in 30 days,
Mars moves in 45 days, Moon moves in 2} days, Jupiter

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 8] =====
iy teTRODUCTIDN.

moves in 360 days., Raha and Kethu in 540 days and Saturn
in 900 days. The various divisions of the signs, the
sources of strength or weakness among the planets, the
names and identifying marks of constellations are not
given here. They are so easily procurable that any student
cant find them in’ the ordinary books sold in the market. The
Author seems to have a clear knowledge of Astrology. He!
first takes the reader through the planetary aspects, then
the good and evil which accrue to planets from ownership,
and then association and conjunction.He describes Rajayoga
(success in life), the combinations for longevity with a
summary of the results of the various planets upon the
horoscopes of persons born in each of the twelve Zodiacal
signs. Rahu and Kethu are shortly introduced and the most
successful as well as the most unfortunate periods have
also been indicated. I have given full notes and trust they
will make the study of this technical subject easy and’
agreeable. The illustrative horoscopes will be found to be
very useful. As my works have already been most heartily
‘welcomed from all parts of the world, I make no farther
apology for ushering this improved 2nd edition before the
sympathetic and appreciative public.

B. SURYANARAIN ROW, 8.A., M.R.A.S., M.A.8.B.

16 April, 1900.
Inpia.

Mapras, }

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 9] =====
श्री ।
Jataka Chundrika.
॥जातकचांदिका॥

 

सिद्धांतमेपनिषदे शद्धा तंपरमष्ठिन।

विणाधरं महताकिचेत्‌ शाणाधरमुपास्महे
॥ छो ॥१॥

 

SEN

ENGLISH TRANSLATION.

— oa, 00
Sranza I.

I invoke the help of that Glorious Light which repre-
sents the sum total of the knowledge of Brahmopanishads
whom we call Saraswathi, the exalted spouse of Brahma,
who holds the Veena (lute), and who is most beautiful
(all perfect):

NOTES.

No author in thesanscrit language commences his work without first
praying to his God and invoking the help of all that is dear to him,
his is generally considered necessary for the completion of the work,
and also for the good of the students who commence to read it.
This is a small work written by Venkatasa Pundita son of Yagnaswara
Dikshitar and though short it is excellently written by him. The au-
thor expounds some-of the best principles of astrology in the most
concise manner possible. Sanscrit works are superior to any others
in the world, in the singular fact of their being written in poetry and
in a strain which enables the student to master the whole of its con-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 10] =====
2 JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

tents without the slightest difficulty. , Pundits carry all their splendid
libraries in their small physical heads and this, when properly used, is
the best way of storing knowledge and using it to-the greatest advan-
tage. Sanscrit Poetry has a peculiar charm which enables the student
to remember the subject with grest facility and quote it without the
slightest exertion. The English translation I have given is not literal,
but liberal and the sanscrit text inserted in the Devanagari character
will help those who .know that beautiful language to compare
the original text with my translation. I have largely added notes
with a view to make the text clear and free from vague or obscure
passages. Saraswati represents all knowledge and all gnana (religious
wisdom). The Veena (lute) is now acknowledged to be the most
perfect of all musical instruments: It is an Indian instrumnnt familiar

to most of the Hindu gentlemen. The perfection of an instrument-.

depends upon its Capacity to reproduce the tunes of other
instruments, faithfully and with grace without its own music being
inimitable. If this definition is correct then we can undoubtedly

classify Veena as the most perfect of musical instruments of all nations _

and of all times, I have seen experts on Veena reproducing most
wonderfully the music of other instruments, while none of the
hundreds of Indian and European musical instruments can hardly
imitate the Dasavida Gamakas which are taught to the student of
Veena as elementary portion of his lessons. If therefore Saraswathi
must have an instrument by the sounds of which she can encharm
the whole worldly phenomena, She has rightly been given Veena
to accomplish that purpose. She is the Suddantham of Brahma, the
Creative Power. That part of Him, which appreciates all knowledge
and which is conscious of it is termed. Saraswathi. Some quote the
2nd stanza which says that ParasaraHora is the safest and most _reli-
able in this Kaliyug and therefore the most valuable for students-
But this is omitted by some manuscripts. Parasara was the father
of Vaysa one of the greatest names in Aryan Religion and he is the
author of various excellent sanscrit works. In the department of law,
Parasara stands unrivalled as his Smrithi is considered as of the greatest,
authority in this yuga. It is therefore an admissable fact, that when
an author compiles from Parasarahora he is entitled to the highest
authority as that Maharishi seems to have had a peculiar knowledge
of the present times and the circumstances which would suit them best.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 11] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA, 3

फरानिनक्षत्रदश्ाप्रकारेणविद्रणमहे। व
य पाराशर होरामञुखत्ययधातेे ॥२॥.

Srayza II.

I shall try to explain the most important principles of
astrology in an intelligible manuer and I shall be guided in
the compilation of my present book by the works of the re-
nowned Maharishi Parasara. ।

. _ .. NOTES,

The author Venkatesa Pundit does not pretend to give the readers
any original information on astrology.” He frankly tells us the source
from which he draws his knowledge _and he commands respect not for

, the original matter he puts before his readers, but for the original way
in which he puts them before the world. He is very concise and exact
to the point he wishes to illustrate. The authority he has quoted
is the highest we have in the Aryan sciences or literature. The
family of Parasara has produced the greatest number of Maharishis
whom the world has ever seen. Inthe case of other Mabarishis
they alone command respect individually by their intellectual great-
ness while their ancestors or progeny are not known or are not men
of equal mental calibre. In the family of Parasara we have a series
of really great men.

Vasista, the venerable Maharishi, than whom no Rishi stands
greater in the intellectual or religious world was the founder of this
dynasty of literary giants. He was the preceptor and priest of
Rama the greatest of Indian heroes and incarnation of Vishnu.
His advice to Rama is embodied in the voluminous work on religious
instruction entitled Yogavasista, composed by Valmiki, and extending
over 36,000 stanzas or 1} times the real bulk of Valmiki Ramayana
so familiar to our readers. This Yogavasista is an extraordinary work,
and the highest religious and moral precepts are related therein with
a grace, and simplicity for which we could never find an equal. Vasista
has also written works on Dharmasastras, astronomy, astrology, medicine

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 12] =====
4 JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

and various other branches of knowledge. S.kti is the son of Vasivt2,
and various works of eminence are attributed to him. Purasara is the
son of Suiti and grandson of Vasista and he has distinguished himselt
in almost every branch of knowledge. Vyasa is the son of Parasara
and is the great grandson of Vasista and the 18 Puranas extending
over many hundred thousands of Stanzas, the compilation of Vedas,
and the Brahmasutras, the Bhgavata and Bharata he has co:nposed, and
the Bhagavat Gita therein embodied will speak for themselves. In addi-
tion to these Vyasa stands as an authority on astronomy and astrology.
Vyasa Siddantha is one of the 18 eminent treatises on Hindu Astrono-
my and Astrology. Suka is the son of Vyasa and has very rightly
eclipsed the father by the depth of religious thought and the knowledge
of Brahma Vidya. He is called Sukayogeendra and richly deserves that
most envious title so hard to secure and so difficult to preserve.

 

बुधेभावादयस्सेवंज्ञेयास्सामान्यङाखर
तः एतत्शाचरानुसारेणसन्ञांमोविरोषतः।
॥६॥ `

Sranza III,

By referring to ordinary works the student can learn
the details of the Jataka Bhaga, but I am going to expound
in my works principles of astrology which would help the
intelligent student in his progress in the astrological
studies,

NOTES.

The author very naturally expects a fair amount of elementary
knowledge in the studont who studies his book,and with this presumption
he says he will give such general principles of astrology as would en-
able the reader to predict much by reading little. This profession of the
learned author shows the great value of his work and ite usefulness, By
elementary knowledge he means the names of the week days, planets,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 13] =====
n

^ ` JATAKACHUNDRIKA. पि]

rasis, constellations, various significations of the houses, their lords
and their sub divisions, planetary characteristics, their sexes, their exal-
tations, and debilitations, retrogrades and accelerations: and other
. necessary information. The Astrological Self Instructor and Primer
I have written will be found to be of immense help to. beginners in
astrology as all the preliminary information needed for a student is ,
clearly given there, : र :

- पर्यंतिस.पमान्सर्वै शनिजीवकुजाः पु

नमविदोषतश्चलिदक्ा लिकोणवतुरश्गान्‌ `

॥४॥ , | ।
Stanza IV.

All the planets aspect the 7th house. Saturn, Jupiter,
and Mars, (Sani, Guru and Kuja) have a special vision.
Saturn aspects 3rd and 10th houses better, Jupiter 5th and
9th houses, and Mars 4th and 8th houses,

NOTES.

All planets aspect the 7th house from the place where they
chance to be at the time of birth, or question, “ By the use of the
term. all Sani, Guru and Kuja are also included, but though those
planets have an aspect in the 7th house, their aspect of that house is
not as strong as the special aspects we have already named. The
aspects of the houses have much significance in the calculations of
astrology and the prédictions ventured on the strength of such com-

‘ putations. Good aspects have beneficial while bad aspects have
malevolent influences, The aspect of a planet is as powerful as its
. occupation or combination in producing results good or bad.

The variations of power in the planetary aspects must be attri-
buted to the refraction of their rays through the media through which
they have to pass before they fall on the earth or the creatures who tenant
its surface. These various modifications of the planetary rays havea great
significance. in the creation, protection and destruction of all phenomena
with which they come in contact

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 14] =====
6 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

सर्वैलिकोणनेतारो ग्रहाःशुभफरप्रदाः॥
पतयाज्ञिषडायानां यदिपापफलप्रदा :॥५॥

Sranza V.

Lords of the 5th and 9th houses are always good,
while lords of the 3rd, 6th and 11th are always evil.
१ NOTES.

The counting of the planets must always be from the birth time
or lagna. Ravi owns Simha, Chundra owns Kataka, Buda owns
Mithuna and Kanya; Sukra is the lord of Vrishabha and Thula, Kuja
owns Mesha and Vrischika, Guru is the lord of Meena and Dhanas,
and Sani owns Makara and Kumbha, Their owning a house is diffe-
rent from their occupation of a house.

Take an example of a living horoscope ofa great man. Birth

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chun- | + “> , fis Vrishabha, lords of Kenya 5th and

wv we Birth. | Sani. Makara 9th Buda and Sani are respec-
ध tively good planets for this lagna, and
Buda ‘\ |when they are favourably situated and
Gata. Biase, spected they produce good. Guru is
he lord of 11th, Sukra is the Jord of

^© हः Gth and Chundra is the lord of 3rd and
these are bad. Their periods and sub-

Sukra.| >, a & 11043 are productive of evil and if
a hu. they derive good strengtk from other

 

sources, they may considerably modify their evil effects, Sani aspects
Sukra, but his aspect of Simha 3rd and Meens 10th from him is stron-
ger, and in predicting the results of those Bhavas we have to remember
the evil aspect and make allowance for such. Sukra aspects Sani
in the 7th and this is his best aspect. Guru aspects Sani and Kuja,
5th and 9th, but he also sees Simha or the 4th house from birth,
_ But this house is also aspected by Ravi and Buda who only have

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 15] =====
‘JATAKACHUNDRIKA, 7

vision in the 7th. Thus the house of education in this horoscope is

बभोष्नल by Sani in the 3rd house, Guru in the ith, and Ravi and Buda
in the 7th, Sany’s aspect is stronger than Guru’s but Ravi and Buda
add weight to 4th house by their aspect, The man will be
highly educated, but there will be some breaks or disappoint
ments on account of the aspect of Sani. 2nd house from birth
is aspected by Sukra, and Guru, and Sani is there. Wealth
will be moderate, but earnings will be decent, ownership
creates rights and liabilities as also the occupation and these various
phases of a planetary strength ought not to be forgotten in balancing
the good and bad results which are indicated by the planetary in-
fluences. Planets may occupy houses without owning them or
occupy their own houses, If they’ are good and oceupy favourable
houses they become better, if not the results must be reversed,

— SOR

नदिरोतिदुभेनणां शु भा-केद्राधिपाय `
दिकरूराश्चदञ्चभ वेते भवलाउन्तरोत्तर॥३॥

‘Stanza VI.

When Benefics own quadrants they produce evil.
When Malefics own quadrants they produce good ; the
good and evil planets become more and more powerful
as they are lords of 1st, 4th, 7th, or 10th, houses; 5th
and 9th houses ; or 8rd, 6th and 11th houses respectively,

NOTES.

1st,4th,7th and 10th, houses are quadrants, Ist,5th and 9th
houses are trines. 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th houses are Oopa-
chayams. Ravi, Sani, Kuja weak Moon (Kshinachundra) and
badly associated Buda are classified as evil planets. Guru, Sukra.
well associated Buda, and Poornachundra are good planets, Lords
of the Ist are weaker than the lords of the 4th, lords of the 4th less
Powerful than those of the 7th and lords of the 7th are weaker than

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 16] =====
8 . JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

those of the 10th. The same gradation applies to’ trines and 3rd, 6th,
and 11th houses also. In the case of evil planets they gradually grow
stronger by being owners of the later quadrants or kendras and get -
the hightest power when they become lords of the 10th. The reverse
holds good with good planets. Benefics owning first house are not so
bad as those owning 4th, and those who own 7th are worse than those
who rule the 4th, and those who own the 10th are tLe worst of the
whole lot. These are very important points and deserve to be speci-
ally remembered by the astrological student.

०96

लप्रात्‌ज्ययद्ितीये शौ परेषां साहचयैतः।
स्थानांतरानुराण्येन भवतःफरूदायको ॥७॥

74924 छा. _ `

The lords of the 2nd. and 12th houses give good or
bad results according as they are in conjunction with the
lords of other houses and the nature of the houses they
occupy.

NOTES

The lords af 2nd and 12th houses have very peouliar ways of
influencing the native. They are not powerful by virtue of their
own merits, but are considerably influenced to give good or eyil
results by the associations they have and the positions they occupy.
Here it seems that where the lords af the 2nd and 12th houses have
associations of other planets, they give more the influences of the
planets who are with them, than their own individual characteristics,
They are considerably influenced by the houses they occupy, thg
planets who are in conjunction withthem, and the position of the
lords of the houses they are placed at the time,

.

é

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 17] =====
SATAKACHUNDRIKA. 9

भाग्यव्ययाधिपेन र॑कोनशुभप्रदः॥
सएवशुभसधाता रग्नाधादाषिचेत्‌स्वये.
Het

Sranza VIII-

Lord of the 8th house produces evil because he owns the
12th house from the 9th, which is the house of Bhagya
(wealth). If he chances to be the lord of Ist also, he be-
comes good-

NOTES

The Lord of the 8 th house is bad as it happens to become the 12th
house from the 9th. The 9th house is the house of peace or happiness
and wealth, and the 12th from that is bad. The reason given here
is rather abrupt and cannot be carried out continuously in the caso
of all houses. It may hold good withthe 7th, because the 12th from
8th bad house must necessarily be good. And the 12th from the 7th
is bad and that {s the 6th house signifying debt, disease and enemies
The 12th from 6th {s the 5th and it fs good, but the 12th from the
5th is 4th and this should be bad by the above reasoning, but it is
notso. The 12th from the 4this 3rdand it is bad, and the 12th from
3rd is 2nd, and the 12th from the 2nd is Ist or birth and these two
are bad. The 12th from the birth is the 12th house and it is bad
but the 12th from 12th is the 11th and itis bad, the 12th from the
11th is the 10th, and the 12th from the 10th is 9th and these two are
good, From the Lagna or birth, two houses on either side happen
to be bad, as we have the lords of 12th and 11th 2nd and 3rd,
pronounced as bad. 1 simply show the reader that the reason given
for the 8th holds good in many cases and fails ina few. There
may be better reasons, but I have net seen any. When the lord
of the 8th also is the lord of the 1st he becomes good. This happens
only in two cases, in the wholo of the zodiac. For Aries and Scorpio
the lord is Kuja and he happens to be lord ot 1st and 8th house's

६

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 18] =====
10 JATAKACHUNDRIKA. ~

when a child is born in Mesha and he becomes good. Take Thula,
Sukra isthe lord of Thula and Vrishabha, and when a_ child is
born in Thula, Sukra who is the lord of Ist and 8th houses becomes
good. This happens in no other sign and therefore when a planet
owns the 8th and any other house. than the first, he becomes bad.
A child born in Kanya has Kuja asthe lord of 3rd and 8th and
he becomes bad. The reasoning above given is based upon the rule
that 12th house signifies loss or death .Loss of bad is good, and loss
of good is bad
= eecnccccs——

In the next three stanzas I shall explain the good
and evil results arising from the ownership of benefic
and malefic planets when they are lords of quadrants and
the 8th house. ऽ
. NOTES.

The author says that in the next three Slokas he will clearly
explain all the good and_ evil influences arising from the planets
owning quadrants (Kendras) and the 8th house. In the 6th Sloka it
was already explained that good planets owning Kendras are pro-
ductive of evil while bad planets owning Kendras are productive
of good. Planets owning the 8th house produce evil. The details
of these good and evil influences will be elaborately explained in
the succeeding three slokas.

AGRI ~

केद्राधिप्यदोषस्तु बखवान्‌ गुरुदाकरयोः।
मारक वेपिचतयो मौरकस्थान संस्थितिः

॥९॥
Sranza IX.

Guru and Sukra owning quadrants become very in-
auspicious. When they occupy the 2nd and 7th houses
with such ownership, they become powerful in inflicting
certain death to the native.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 19] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 11

NOTES.

It has already been pointed out in the previous notes that
Guru and Sukra are pure benefics and that when they own quadrants
(Kendras) they produce evil. If they own Kendras and also occupy
the 2nd and 7th houses (Maraka or death houses) they become
very powerful in theif periods and subperiods (Dasas and Vidasas)
in producing death to the native. The possessor of a horoscope is
called technically a native and throughout this and_ other astrologi-
cal works, the term native must be understood in this sense, unless
the contents give ita different meaning. Takean example. Toa
person born in Mesha, Sukra is the lord of 2nd and 7th houses,
and if he is in the 2nd or 7th houses he will inflict death. One born
in Mithuna will have evil from Guru, and- if he chances to be in
Kataka or Dhanas, he will surely cause death as he owns the two
Kendras 7th and 10th.

 

बुधस्तदनुचेद्ोपि भ्वेत्तद्नुतद्विः। नरं
भरेश्ञवदोषस्तुस्नयाचंदमसोभवेत्‌॥१०॥ `

Sranza X.

Buda is less malicious than Guru and Sukra and
Chundra is less than Buda. Ravi and Chundra do not
give evil even when they own the 8th house,

' NOTES,

We have seen the principle that good planets owning quadrants
are inauspicious, Budais not a complete benefic. His goodness
or badness depends upon his associations. Therefore he comes next
in order after Gura and Sukra, Chundra comes after Buda, for
even without evil association he becomes least auspicious when he
is newmoon. Therefore when well associated Buda, and full moon
own quadrants, they produce evil and if they occupy the 2nd and
7th houses, they become powerful to inflict death, but this power
is next to Guru and Sukra. Lords of the 8th house are eyil, but Ravi

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 20] =====
12 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

and Chundra do not produce bad results even when they own the
8th house. They seem to be an exception to the general rule.
There are two sets of planets—Ravi and Chundra, own each
only one house, while Kuja, Buda, Guru, Sukra, and Sani own each
two houses. The first two planets are called Ekarasyadipathies,
while the other five are called Dwirasyadhipathies, In the case of
the last five they become lords of 8th house in addition to some
other house, but in the case of Ravi and Chundra, they become only
lords of 8th house for one house each. For Dhanas Chundra is the
lord of the 8th house Kataka, and he becomes good are rather he
does not produce evil. For Makara Ravi is the lord of the 8th
house Simha and he does not do evil. The lord of the 8th house
is had, but an exception seems to have been made in favour of Ravi
and Chundra, and also those two planets Kuja and Sukra when they
happen to own the Ist or birth signs.

—010400—

कुजस्यकमेनेत.वपरयुक्तश्ुभकारिता।ि
PUTA GA A न कर्मदा.वमात्रत,॥११॥

Sranza XI.

Kuja (Mars) does not become good when he owns
only the 10th house. He must own the 5th also to become
thoroughly good,

NOTES.

It will bo shown hereafter that for producing beneficial results
the combination of the lords of Kendras and Thrikonas is necessary,
Kuja is an evil planet, his owning the 10th house as a bad planet
is the best, but the author seems to make a distinction, Unless
Kuja also owns in addition to his 10th, 5th house he. will not produce
much good. This double combination in Kuja could only happen
when a person is born in Kataka, Here he becomes lord of Sth
and 10th and becomes exceedingly powerful to do good. When a person
is born in Kumbha Kuja owns 3rd and’l0th honses and therefore is

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 21] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 13

not auspicious. For persons born in Dhanas - Kuja is the lord of
the 5th and 12th and therefore is not so auspicious. In the enume-
ration of these particular houses and ownerships, the author attaches
much significance, and unless the combination is as full as it is dis-
eribed, the results attributed ought not te be predicted. Each com-
bination has its own value and it must be carefully studied.

 

यद्यत्‌भवगतौवापियद्यत्‌भवेशसंयुतो!
तत्तत्फलानिभरवरो भरदिरेतां तमोह.
॥१२॥

Stanza XII.

Rahu and Kethu give the same results as those given
by the houses they occupy, the planets they are in con-
junction with, and the aspects they are subjected to but
with greater strength.

NOTES.

Rahu and Kethu are once for all dealt with in this stanza by
the author and dismissed. They own no houses, and they are called
shadowy planets or chayagrahams. I have explained at great length what
is meant byRahu and Kethu in the Astrological Magazine and stu-
dents would do well to refer to it for more complete information.
They give the Phalam of the Rasis they occupy, the planets they are
associated with, and the aspects they have. Take an example.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 22] =====
14

Meena is birth,

JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

Rahuis in the 4th house with Sukra and

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
  

 

| - Sani _— Sukra Pspected by Sani and Guru. 3rd and
*) Buda. | p0\;, | Rabu. th houses respectively. Rahu occu-

ies Buda’s house. Therefore the

Kuja. Jphalam that Rahu gives is the phalam

Bases: f Buda, Sani, Sukra and Guru.

All these sources of strength must be

refully calculated and balanced
——|———_—-_|——_]before we venture to make any pre-
K ictions about Rahu. Kethu will
क. क ive the results of Guru and Sukra,

 

because he is in the

house of. Guru and aspected by Sukra. The

phalam of the houses they occupy viz Mithuna and Dhanas must
also be taken into consideration. But in giving good or evil they

act with greater ene
harm, if well disposed

rgy, and when badly disposed they do mere
they do more good than the houses they

occupy, the planets they are in conjunction with, and the lords who
aspect them. Among the ancient works, Rahu and Kethu are not
much treated of as they generally give the results of the houses
they are in and the planets they are joind with.

StS

केद्रत्रिकाणपतयस्संबंधेनपरस्परं।इतरेर
भसक्ताश्चेत्विरोषफटदायकाः॥१६॥

Sranza XIII.

If the lords of the Kendras are in conjunction with
the lords of the Thrikonas without being associated with
the lords of other houses, they become extremely power-
ful in producing good results.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 23] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 15

NOTES.

This is rather a difficult but very important stanza, Ravi and
Chundra own each only one house, while the other five planets
Kuja, Buda, Guru, Sukra, and Sani own each: two houses. The
conjunction may be in the act of owning the two houses one of
which is a quadrant, and the other a trine, or it may refer to two
different planets each owning one of these houses, and both being
in conjunction in any one of the 12 signs of the zodiac. It the
_sloka means a conjunction of the ownership of these two houses in
one planet, Ravi and Chundra form exceptions to this principle
as they only own one house, and cannot therefore have a combination
of the ownerships of Kendras and Thrikonas referred to above,
In the case of other Aye planets, Guru and Buda do not by their
peculiar ownership of corner houses as it were, cannot also own
Kendras and Thrikonas together. Therefore there are only 3 planets
who have the special privilege of owning Kendras and Thrikonas
together for children born in 6 lagnas. ‘Ihey are Vrishabha, Kataka
Simha, Thula, Makara, and Kumbha. Kuja is the lord of 5th
and 10th for Kataka, and lord of 4th and 9th for Simha, Sani is
lord of 4th and 5th for Thula and lotd of 9th and 10th for Vrishabha,
Sukra is lord of 5th and 10th for Makara, and lord of 4th and
9th for Kumbha. This shows that Kuja, Sukra and Sani join
ownership of Kendras and Thrikonas for two Rasees each. Looking
to the meaning of the succeeding slokas as explained by the
author itis clear that the sense is not restricted to this concep-
ton of joint ownership of Kendras and Thrikonas only in one
planet. ‘The union of lords of Kendras and Thrikonas is clearly
indicated and the interpretation must be* such as would be con-
sonant with the declared general principles of astrology. ‘The
planets in conjunction may either own Kendras and Thrikonas
eich in himself or may be lords of the different houses which
form Kendras and Thrikonas. Sanskrit is very flexible and the
plural noun Lords used in the original sanscrit can be interpre—
ted in either way or both ways. The compiler lays stress upon
the conjunction of the lords of the Kendras and Thrikonas alone.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 24] =====
16 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

If they are associated with the lords of other houses, their value
to produce good, will be considerably lessened. If, in such a con—
junction, we have the association of the lords of the 3rd, 6th, 8th,
11th and 12th, the combination produces little good. In the
illustration given on page 6 of this book, the combination of Ravi
and Buda lords of 4th and 5th in the 10th has been zonsider-
ably weakened by their association with Guru lord of 8th and
11th houses. Still the combination is good and it makes the
native concerned famous, educated and influential. The produc-
tive capacity of planets combining must always depend upon their
relative sources of strength and this must never be forgotten
by the astrological students who venture into the thorny fields of
prediction. If the lords of the Kendras and Thrikonas are exalted
without evil associations or aspects, it stands to reason to suppose
that they will give better results than when they are debilitated,

 

केद्रत्रिकोणनेतारौ दाषयुक्तावपिस्वयं,
संबधमात्राब्दलिनौ भवेतांयोगकारकौ।

॥१४॥

Sranza XIV

The lords of the Kendras and Thrikonas in con-
junction produce good from the simple fact of their
union even when they are weak otherwise.

NOTES.

This stanza when read carefully points to a sort of contra-
diction to what has already been enunciated in the pre-
vious sloka. There he says that if the lords of Kendras and
Thrikonas are in conjunction without being associated by the
lords of other houses they are powerful in doing good. In
this stanza he says that the simple fact of their union is quite-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 25] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 17

enough to make them give good even when they are otherwise”
weak. But on a closer examination there is no contradiction
whatever. In the first the idea is that Lords of the Kendras
and Thrikonas ought not to be joined with the lords of other house
when producing good and in this sloka the ideg is that their
conjunction is productive of good even when they are not power-
fulin other ways. The illustrations will make the point clear.
The conjunction of the lords of Kendras and Thrikonas when they
are exalted, in their own houses, in Moolathrikongs and in friend- .
ly houses or quadrants cannot producs the same results as when
the associated planets are debilitated, in enemies houses, in un-
favouaable signs. If the conjointed planets occupy LOth house
they give vesults different from what they would do when they
are inthe 6th. Even when: the sources of strength to the planets
are weak, i e, by owning bad houses, by bad yergas ete, their’ con-
junction is productive of good when they are lords of Kendras and
Thrikonas. One sloka refers to associations and the other to
sources of strength and weakness. But in either case the vari-
ous planetary aspects, conditions and other important points con-
nected with them jcould not be safely neglected in making predic-
tions. All that the author wishes to point out is that the conjunc-
tion of the lords of Kendras and Thrikonas is good and will
produce results according to their various sources of strength.

निवन्ततांग्यव्यरे/नतावबुभो धमेकमेणोः
छेकन्नान्यतरोवाप्विसेचेत्योगकारको
 .॥१५॥
Sraxza XV,

If the lords of the 9th and 10th houses join together
and occupy the 9th or 10th, or if the lord of the 9th
vecupies the 9th and the lord of the 10th occupies 10th
house they produce good,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 26] =====
18 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

NOTES.

The union of the Lords of Kendras and Thrikonas exercises a be-
neficial influence, There are four Kendras and three trines. Ist house
is a Kendra as well as a Thrikona but it is usually counted as a Ken-
dra, But for Rjayoga or political success the author particularly
draws the attention of the reader, to the importance of the junction
of the lords of the 9th and 10th houses. By the principle explained
(vide P. 7 of this book) in stanza VI the lords of the 9th and 10th
- are the most powerful and their combination is naturally looked for
as the best for success. Political success must be understood in a
liberal sense. All those appointments which are partly or wholly
controlled by the government of any country come under this
heading and a poor peon has Rajayoga a3 well as the mightiest
Emperor. The strength of the planets determines the weight to
be attached to the appointment. Several cases are hinted here by
the learned Compiler. Lords of the 9th and 10th may join and
occupy any house. They may occupy the 9th or 10th houses to-
gether. Lord of the 9th may be inthe 10th and the lord of the
10th may bein the 9th. Lord of the 9th may be in the 9th and
the lord of the 10th in the 10th house. As kas already been pointed
out the aspects of planets are as strong as their combinations, If
82 the aspect of the lord of the 9th on the lord of the 10th or vice versa
also produces Rajayoga. Ifthey are in the same constellation
although not in the same Rasi, they produce Rajayoga. The first
padam of Krithika belongs to Mesha, while the other 3 padams
belong to Vrishabha. But ifthe lords of the 9th and 10th are in
that star, they may produce good. The supposition indicates t!2
combination of two separate planets. But take Vrishabha. ‘Ine
lords of the 9th and 10th are one andthe same—Sani. He
may be in Makara or Kumbha, or he may be in any other
house. For one born in Vrischika, the combination of Chun-
dra and Ravi is good. But Ravi and Chundra join only
in the Zodiac in any house or they may join in Kataka or Simha, but
the combination of the two lordships in one planet of Kendras and
Thrikonas is not possible in either of their zases,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 27] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 19

` त्रिकोणाधिपयोमंध्येसंबधायेनकेनचित्‌
केद्राधिपस्यवलिनोभ्वेत्‌यदिसयोगङृत्‌,.
॥१३॥

Stanza. XVI

Lords of Kendras joining with or lying between lords
of Thrikonas produce Rajayoga.

NOTES.

This is a difficult stanza and can be interpreted in various ways"
We havealready seen that the combination of the Lords of Kendras and
Thrikonas is productive of good. The word Madhya used in the sloka
confuses the passage a little, It means middle or with and the mean-
ing then changes a good deal. Suppose we have Mesha as Lagna,
then any one of the lords of the Kendras, Kuja, Chundra, Sukra and
Sani, may be between the two plancts Ravi and Guru lords of trines,
or they may be with the lords of Thrikonas, Where a lord of the
Kendra occupies a place between two lords of trines and has their
aspect or aspects any one of them, there will be success. The lord of
a Kendra may occupy a place between lords of Thrikonas, but need not
have their aspect or need not combine with any one of them. It is
possible to havea planet between two lords of trines, owning a Kendra
and in conjunction with the lords of any other house. Here the posi-
tion may not be very suitable if the combining planet is evil. If the
word between is not considered, then I fail to see the use of this stanza
‘as we have already been told of the production of Rajayoga by the
conjunction of the lords of the Kendras and Thrikonas. The conjunc-
tion and aspects of unfavourable planets necessarily take away much
of the good which may otke-wise arise from the position of these
planets. The lords of the 5th and 9th are referred to, although we
know as a matter of fact that the lord of the 5th is weaker than the’
lord of the 9th in producing good. The same holds good in the case
of the lords of the Kendras,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 28] =====
20 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

It looks sensible to interpret this stanza as meaning, that the
mere position of a planet owning a Kendra, between the two lords of
the Thrikonas, is sufficient to produce Rajayoga, and this meaning is
not inconsistent with what is to fullow hereafter. Where a planet is in
the vicinity of two beneficial planets it is natural to suppose that their
influence makes him yield good results, The lord of the 5th also lus
been given herea prominent place in the production of Rajuyoga.

EO

 

वदास्वपिभवेययोगः श्रायदोयोगकारि

णोःदज्ञाद्वयीमध्यगता तदयुकञ्ुभकारि

TTT UNWIN
Sranza XVII

When an evil planet intervenes between the Dasas
of two Yoga-karaka planets, not in union with them
he produces good when his subperiods occur in those
planetary periods or when his subperiod comes in any other
powerful planetary Dasa.

NOTES.

The periods of all planets contain the subperiods of all other pla-
nets, This stanza is capable of a good number of interpretations.
Powerful planets are the lords of trines. For Rajayoga we have to
depend upon the strength of the conjunction of the lords of Kendras and
Thrikonas. There seems to be a peculiar virtue in their mutual con-
junction, If the two planetary periods owning ‘I'hrikonas are separated
hy the period of an evil planet /¢ by the lord of the 3rd, 6th,8th,11th,or_

2th, houses, they seem to give the unfavourable planet strength to
produce good in his subperiods, This may occur in 6 cases. ‘The periods
‘of Chundra and Rahuare separated by Kuja, an evil planet, Kuja’s
subperiod in Chundra or Rahu may be good. Chundra’s and Rahu’s
subperiods in Kuja may be good. Kuja’s subperiod in any other fa-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 29] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 21

vourable planet may be good or the subperiod of that powerful planet
in the period of Kuja may produce favourable results. We have seen
in the last few stanzas that the lords of the Kendras. especially those
of the Thrikonas are favourable, A planetary period, even when he is bud
by position, aspect or association becomes good when it intervenes
between two powerful planetary periods by virtue of its lord occupy-
ing a middle position as it were between two well situated planets.
Tis strength seems to be chiefly attributable to its being hemmed in
by the influences of two powerful planets on either side which produce
good,

योगकारकसंबधाः पापिनोापिय्रहास्स्व
तः तत्तत॒भुत्क्यनुसारेणादिशोयुर्योगिकंफं
॥१८॥

Stanza XVIII.

Evil planets viz. lords of 3rd, 6th, 8th, 11th, and 12th
houses, when in conjunction with powerful Rajayoga pla-
nets, also produce favourable results in their subperiods
according to their own sources of strength at the time.

NOTES.

We have already shown whoare powerful planets. Lords of the
Kendras are powerful when they are associated with the lords of the
Thrikonas. When lords of 3rd, 6th, 8th,11th, and 12th houses join with
powerful planets what would be the result? The compiler says that
powerful planets lose a part of their strength to produce good when
they are joined with evil planets and powerless planets gain some good
by joining with powerful planets. Thislooks very natural. A good
man becomes partly bad by evil associations while a bad man also
modifies a part of his conduct by his good associations. Conjunction
his much influence and modifies greatly the nature of the planets
thus united. Evil planets give good in their subperiods when they
are in conjunction with Rajayoga planets. ^

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 30] =====
22 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

अंदिरकैदवोतरिकोणेवा निवसतां तमोह!
नाथेनान्यतरस्येवसबधायोगकारको
॥१९॥ |

Sranza XIX.

When Rahu and Kethu occupy Kendras or Thriko-
nas with the lords of other houses they produce good.

NOTES.

When Rahu and Kethu occupy Kendras or Thrikonas with other
planets they give success. Who are those other planets? If Rahu and
Kethu occupy Kendras and they are in union with the lords of Thri-
konas they become good. 1f Rahu and Kethu occupy trines and
they are in combination with the lords of quadrants they produce good.
In this case, the illustration is simply a repetition of the principle
already enunciated, only that instead of the combination of the lords
of Kendras and Thrikonas we have the combination of Rahu and
Kethu in quadrants or trines with planets in those houses. . But the
stanza above says “in combination with other planets.” These other
planets may refer to the planets of any other houses than those of
quadrants or trines. The violation of a well recognised principle in
astrology may not have been contemplated by the author, but in this
case of Rahu and Kethu, occupying Kendras or Thrikonas, their com-
bination with any other planets may possibly be productive of good
results. Ifthe planets in conjunction are owners of unfavourable
signs it is reasonable to expect that they will not be productive of
much good but if the planets are owners of quadrants or trines they
will produce splendid success. 1t may be that planets with Rahu
and Kethu in Kendras or Thrikonas make those shadowy planets
strong, and as they give Phalam with greater energy, they become
good by their occupying good places in the horoscope,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 31] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 23

केद्रत्रिकोणाधिपयोरेक्येतेयोगकारकाः
।अन्यत्रिकोणपतिना सबंधोयवीर्कफर
॥२०॥

SranzaXX.

The union of the lordship of the Kendra and Thrikona
in one planet’ produces good. But when the lords of the
other Thrikonas join the lords of Kendras they will sure-
ly produce better results,

NOTES.

We have already seen that wherea lord of the Kendra joins a
lord of the Thrikona both produze Rajayoga. Such combination
may be in one planet orin two planets. There are some houses
whose lords become owners of Kendras and Thrikonas, and in such
cases the author says the union produces good. But when the lords
of the Kendras are distinct from the lords of the Thrikonas, and
these two join together in any house, the result will be much better
than in the case of the union of the two lordships in one and the same
planet. Thula has Sani as the lord of 4th and Sth, and Vrishabha has
him again as the lord of 9th and 10th but in these two cases the owner-
ship of these houses belongs to one and the samo planet and this is
already shown as producing favourable results. But for Vrischika
Moon is the lord of the 9th and Sun is the lord of the 10th, the com-
bination of these two is productive of better results. The conjunction
of two different planets is better for purposes of Rajayoga than the
union of the lordship of the two houses in one and the same planet.
Different rays happily blended seem to produce be'ter results than
the same rays coming from different houses but belonging to the same

planet. Grafting produces more racy fruits than simple fruits pro-
duce on the same tree.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 32] =====
24. JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

धर्मक्माधिनतारौ रंधलाभाधेपौयादि)
तयोस्सवेधमात्रेणनयोगेरखभतेनरः॥२९॥
6374 प्र+ इ दा.

Where the lords of the 9th and 10th houses are joined
by the lords of the 8th and 11th houses success is endangered.

NOTES

It has been already explained that the combination of the lords
of the 9th and 10th houses is always productive of splendid Raja-
yogam or success. Political success may roughly mean Rajayogam,
and will be equivalent to service under the ruling authorities. In the
life of man success may be achieved in various departments, such as
merchants, bankers, lawyers, brokers, barbers, shoemakers, cooks, cul-
tivators, mechanics, engineers, musicians, authors, poets, dramatists,
and so on. In the last 6 or 7 stanzas, the author has entirely devoted
his explanation to the combinations of the lords of the Kendras and
hrikonas and-when these are absent, the man may succeed well
in any walk of life but not as an official, The conjunction of
the lords of 8th and 11th houses with Rajayogam planets, is bad as
they produce eyil and corrupt the influences of even good planets
like the lords of the 9th and 10th houses. The simple combination of
the lords of the 9th and 10th without the union of other planets, and
without any aspects is the best for Rajayoga. But where they are joined
with the lords of other Kendras and Thrikonas they will produce good.

SOS

The author now comes ta the most important part of man’s career
viz. the length of life which each man enjoys. He tries to deter-
mine in what period and subperiod the natjve will have death. Readers
are particularly requested to carefully bear in mind the principles
enunciated by the author as nothing can be more significant than the
length of lives of men for any bady in this world. There can be no
painting without a back ground, and there can beno enjoyment of
goodor bad results without life to continue them. |

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 33] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA, 25

अष्टमेहयायुषस्थानमषटमादष्ठमचतत्‌।त
यारपिव्ययस्थानंमारकस्थानसुच्यते॥२२॥

Stanza XXII.

The 8th house from Lagna and the 8th from that 8th
are called houses of life. The 12th house from these two
are called houses of death,

NOTES.

The 8th house from Birth is the house of life as also the 8th
honse again from this 8th house. There are therefore two houses
viz. the 3rd and 8th from Lagna which are called the houses of life.
The 12th house from the 8rd is the 2nd house from Lagna and the
12th from the 8th house is the 7th from Lagna. These two, 2nd
and 7th houses represent death. Take an example. The 8th from
birth which is Thula, is Vrishabha,
sa the 8th from Vrishabha is Dhanas,

these two Dhanas and Vrishabha are
ealled houses of life. The 12th from
the 8th Vrishabha is Mesha and the
~ ॐ ता 12th from Dhanas is Vrischika and
Takia dra |these two are called houses of death.
Kethu,] Practically the 3rd and 8th houses
from Lagna are houses of life and
Kuja,|the 2nd and 7th are houses of death.
When the lords of the houses of life are
strong, when good planets join those houses or when those houses are
aspected by them they produse long life; if not the result will be un-
favourable. Life and death therefore have to be primarily deter-
mined by the strength or weakness of the planets who own those
houses, who are in conjunction with them, who are occupying those

houses and who aspect them. The dotails will be explained in the
next few slokas.

 

 

Rahu.

 

 

Ravi | Guru | p-
Sani. | Buda. Birth.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 34] =====
26 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

 तत्राण्याद्यव्ययस्थानात्‌उत्तरंवखवन्तरं |
तदीशतुस्तत्रगताःपापिनस्तेनसंयुताः॥२६॥

SranzA XXIII.

The 2nd house is stronger in inflicting death than the
7th; planets who occupy the 2ndare stronger in killing
persons than the lords of the 2nd; those who are in con-
junction with the lord of the 2nd are still more powerful
in causing death.

NOTES.

Out of the two houses named for causing death the 2nd is stron-
gr. Planets who occupy the 2nd are stronger than the planets who
own the 2nd, and the planets who are in conjunction with the lord
of the 2nd are the most powerful in causing death. Here the
meaning will be illustrited by reference to an example, Take the
horoscope given under Stanza 22. Thula is birth. The 2nd house
Scorpio is stronger in inflicting death to the native than the 7th
Mesha. Planets Guru and Buda who are in the 2nd house Vrischika
are stronger than the lord of the 2nd Kuja in causing death. But
suppose there were a planet or planets with Kuja lord of the 2nd,
they would have been stronger in causing death than even Guru and
Buda. In the particular horoscope which is about 58 years old, avd
belonging to a gentleman in high position, the Dasa of Kuja only took
away his wife by drowning, and caused him severe illness. But now
the period of Guru is coming and he will inflict death. He is the
lord of the 3rd and 6th houses, he joins the lord of the 9th and 12th
houses, and he occupies the 2nd house. This causation of death
occurs in the periods or subperiods according to the relative strength
of the d- ath inflicting pl nets and also upon the strength of the lord _
of the birth on whose power greatly depends the question of longe-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 35] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. * oe

vity. ‘The skill of the astrologer consists in weighing these different
circumstances and in carefully looking to the yarious sources of
strength or weakness which the planets possess. The correctnezs
of his judgment depends not only upon the deep knowledge of the
technicalities of the subject but also upon the readiness with
which he grasps the points presented for examination and decision.

 

तेषोदशापाकेषुसंभवेन्निधनंन्रणां। ते
षामसंभवेसाक्षात्व्ययाधीशदजश्ास्वाप. `
॥२९॥

Sranza XXIV.

The close of the periods-of the planets who are with
the lords of the 2nd and 7th houses causes death; next the
periods of the planets who occupy the 2nd ane the 7th
houses cause death; if death does no happen in the above
circumstances it will be caused in the dasas of the lords of
the 2nc and 7th houses.

NOTES.

The author wants to explain clearly the periods when death
may be expacted. Co nbination for Balarista, short,middle, and long
lives are given in other well known works, The several sources
of strength and weakness of the plane's are also given in them.
Having regard for these well known principles of astrology we have
to find out when and by whom the natives death is likely to be
caused. There are three cases named here. (1, Planets who occupy the
2nd and 7th houses produce death, (2) planets who are lords of the
2nd and 7th houses inflict death, (3) planets who are not owners of
2nd and 7th houses, and who are not occupying those houses but who

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 36] =====
23 AATAKACHUNDRIKA.

join with the lords of those houses cause death. The author now
goes on to show which planets are foremost in inflicting death.
Planets who join with the lords of the 2gd and 7th houses gre very
rowerful in egysing death at the end of their periods. Then come
the planets who occupy the death houses. If death is not caused in
the periods of these planets then the dords of the 2yd & 7th hoyses will
inflict death themselves,

 

अराभेपुनरेतेषांसंबधनव्ययरातुः क्व
चित्रभानाचदकास्वष्टमेदादशासुच२५॥

 

Sranza XXY,

lf the periods of the: planets occupying or owning
death houses do not come in time to cause death then death
ynay happen inthe Dasa of plarets who are not Yoga-
karakas but who are auspicious and combina with the lords
of death houses: if death does not happen in these it must

be predicted in the periods of the Jords of the 3rd and 8th
houses.

NOTES,

As we go on we shall have occasion to mention some combina~
tions which produce Balarista or early death. There are other com-
binations which produce Madyarista py death after Balarista period
of 8 years, and before 20 years. Yogarista extends from 20 to 32

years and these must be noted. Then there gre conjunctions for
Alpauyuryoga (short life}  Madhayuryoga ‘middle life), Poornyur-
yoga (long life), and Aparamithayuryoga, (unlimited life),All these
combinations pre elaborately detailed in my notes to the Surcartha+

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 37] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA.. 29.

chintamani and the Astrological Self Instructor. Please refer to them

for full information on this most vital question of life. Without
reference to Dasas or Bhookties these combinations give to or take
away life from the person. We cannot be therefore too careful

about these special conjunctions of planets. Planets in’ death houses
produce death, if they do not, then those who own them produce death,

if they do not, then planets who do not combine in themselves or

with others the lordships of the Kendras and Thrikonas, but who are
auspicious or good, may cause death; if these planets also do not cause

death, then the author wants us to fix the period of death in the Dasa
or Bhookti of the lords of the 3rd and 8th houses. Longevity is first
to be determined with reference to Aristas or evil combinations; if
they allow the native to live, then by a. process called Graha- Datta
Pinduyurdaya it must be determined what each planet with reference
to its own sources of strength and weakness, contributes inthe shape
of life to the native born, so that the length of life will be the sum

total of these various periods of life granted by the planets to the
foetus in the womb. This process must be used only after the Bala-
vista period has expired and not before. We have seen that the lords

of the 3rd and 8th houses are evil and they produce death, if others
fail. In the next stanza the author determines death isi the period
of the most evil planet. f all these fail Sani will cause death as he
is evid and always inclined to do bad. :

 

केवलानां चपापानां दश्ञासुनिधनंउक्ित्‌।
PETA AT OUTTA SATA UA
Stanza XXVI. .

When the periods of death-inflicting planets are not
appearing in time to cause death, the planet most inaus-
picious in the horoscope will cause death at any time.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 38] =====
30 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

NOTES.

As I have already stated there may be some combinations which
show that death must happen at a particular period, and that period
might not bo in tima to kill the native. Here it is clear that the
author wants the student to find out the length of life by Graha Datta
Pinda Ayurday2 and then seo which period is likely to corresnond
to the term of life so found out by mathematical calculations. There
are also various combinations mentioned in other works which roughly.
determine the length of life. Take an example. A child has
Balurizta which means tht it will or may die within 8 years. But
8 years is a Jong period. We have to find out which period, month,
and day will terminate its existence during those 8 y-ars. This must
he found out with referenec to the periods or subperiods which come
inthat time. Suppose at the time of birth a Yogakaraka planet
rules the native, he will be unwilling to kill the native himself
and his friends also share the same feeling. But if there is
strong Balarista combination the child must die, and Wwe have
to look to a certain planet asthe terminator of the child's existence,
Those who are with or aspected by the yozakaraka do not kill. Then
we have to finda planet who is the most inauspicious among the
remaining lot and aseribe death to his period or subperiod. In the
determination of the extent of evil, we have to look to other works
on astrology for information. Planets hive dsbilitutioas, exiltition s
retrogrades, accelerations, humilities, combustions, favourable or wn-
favotrable conjunctions, Jateral, periodical and positional influences,
ownership of good and bad houses, malefic and benefic aspects
unfriendly influon ces, and various other sources of strength and weak.
ness which the planets possess at the time of birth. A knowledge of
ull these becomes absolutely necessary to correctly determine which
planet becomes the strongest and which the weakest. Weakest pla-
nets are always productive of evil, although they may have been clas "e
fied as beneficz. A debilitated Guru, owning kendras or 8th ang
11th houses is as mischievous as Sani or any other evil planct. The

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 39] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 31:

inauspicious planet may cause death at any time, that is, at the time
when it is most mischievous. Goodness in any planet saves all life.

 

-+-------

मारकैस्सहसबधान्निहंतापापङृत्छानिः
आतिकम्येतरान्‌सवौन्भवस्येवनसंरायः
URN

Stanza XXVIII.

Sani, inclined to do evil by his conjunction with lords
of death houses or those who have any power to inflict
death,will cause death in preference to any of those planets.

NOTES.

Sani is an evil planet of the first water. He is the weakest of
the planets and therefore the most mischievous. His rays when un-
favourable produce ar. amount of misery such as the rays of no other
planet could produce. He is rightly dreaded by the whole mankind.

Naturally evil, he waits for an opportunity to take the life of a per-
son. In each horoscope every planet has Jurisdiction over certain

events of the native’s life. Their work will be determined by their
combinations and aspects at the time of birth and tke subsejuent
modifications of their influences by their as well as the revolutions
of the sun. The author has enumerated the various planets who are
likely to cause death; if Sani is one of them he will inflict death in
preference to any other planet empowered to put an end to the exis-
tence of the native. In some cases this works good while in others
it does evil. The periods of Guru, Sani and Buda are closely follow-
ing each other. If these planets are death inflicting, then the period
of Sani will be stronger than that of either Guru or Buda to cause

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 40] =====
32

JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

death. Take the horoscope of a gentleman living. Guru is the lord

 

|
dra.
Rahu,

 

Birth.

lof ‘8th and 11th houses, Kuja is the
Sani. flord of 7th and 12th houses, Buda is
he lord of the 2nd and 5th houses

 

1
Ravi.

Buda.

ie :

nd Sani is the lordof the 9th and
h. houses. As per rules stated

oes

i ready, lords of 2nd. and 7th are

ath inflieting. Buda and Kuja are
Maraka planets. But those who are

 

 

Sukra.

 

 

Kuja

Kethu

hose who join the lords of the 2nd and

 

sue] ESR] the 2nd and 7thare stronger and

th are strongest in inflicting death.

 

In the example given above Sani is stronger than Buda being in the
2nd house but Guru is stronger than Saai in caasing death because
he is in conjunction with the lord of the 2nd house Buda.

There sre 27 constellations or Nakshatras and they are divided
among the nine planets including Rahu and Kethu. The planetary
periods are thus arranged.

Krittika
Oottara

Oottarashada

Rohiny

Hasta

Sravanam
Mrigasira

Chitta

Dhanista

Auridra
Swathy

Sathabhisha
Poornarvasu

Visakha

Poorvabhadra
Pooshiami
Anooradha *%
Oottarabhadra

| period extending over 6 years.

प period 10 years, `

em mS ~~

Kuja’s period 7 years.
Rahu’s period 18 years.
Guru’s Dasa 16 years.

Sani’s Dasa 19 years,

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 41] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 33

Auslasha ~
Jaista Buda’s Period 17 years.

। Raivathy

Makha .

Moola Kethu’s Period 7 years. Res

Aswini

Poobba वि

५०० | ००८५ Period 20 गा > ent cat

The total of all these planetary periods will give 120 years as the
extreme limit of the man’s general age. There are instances of persons
living beyond this period, but they fall under exceptions. Taking the
horoscope given on page 32, I shall also give the Navamsa :—

 

Please note carefully the
ming—Guru is the lord
HH the 8th and 11th houses
nd is evil. He occupies 10th
ouse from birth with Ravi
nd Buda and 11th house from
= ~ [- hundra. From Lagna Buda
wns 2nd and 5th houses
d Ravi owns 4th house.
gn has evil planets on both
ides, Sani in the 2nd and

  
   
   
  

Birth.
Guru,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sani,

एण]. fhundra and Rahu in the
Buda. | Kethu. Ravi. Chundra 94), These with Kuja and

Sukra. Kethu in the 6th indicate

 

Balarista or early death. Sukra lord of birth is in the 8th aspected by
Sani. These are evil combinations for early death. But the presence
of Guru, Buda and Ravi in the 10th house which is the last and the best
quadrant saved the life and the gentleman is living. He passed through
very serious dangers in Sukra’s Period early in life and his life was des-
paired of on more than half a dozen occasions and the occupation of
the 10th by auspicious planets saved him from an early grave. We
shall examine his future life. Sani is in the 2nd house. Guru owns
8th and 11th houses and Buda owns 2nd and 5th houses. There are
3 planets threatening his life viz., Guru, Sani and Buda. As per illus-
tration of the above principle we have to look to the most powerful
a

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 42] =====
34 JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

for causing death. Guru owning 8th and 12th houses is bad enough,
Sani is in the 2nd and Buda owns the 2nd house. Of these Sani must
be declared to have jurisdiction to kill the person as he is in the
2nd house, has evil disposition and he occupies a middle position
between Guru and Buda. This is strengthened further by his
position in the Navamsa. There Sani is the lord of the 10th and
11th houses, occupies the 7th with Kuja lord of the Ist and 8th
houses, Ravi lord of the 5th and Sukra lord of the 2nd and 7th
houses, and is aspected by Guru lord of the 9th and 12th houses.
Buda is also bad as he owns 3rd and 6th houses and occupies the
9th house. From Chundra inthe Amea Sukra is the lord of the
2nd and 9th houses, Ravi is the lord of the 12th and Kuja is the lord
of the 8rd and 8th houses, All these are in the 2nd, Sani is the lord
of the 5th and 6th houses. Their occupation of the 2nd where Sani is
exalted and Ravi is debilitated, is very peculiar and they empower
Sani to do his murderous work in preference to Guru who comes be
fore Sani and Buda who comes after him. I can only indicate
briefly the line of argument, leaving the readers to use their own intele
ligence and judgment, in the horoscope submitted for their consider-

ation as ay example,

नदिशेयु्रहास्सवे खदज्ञासु सखथुक्तिषु ।

शुभाशुभफलं दणामात्मभावानुसारतः ॥ २८ ॥
Sranza XXVIII.

Planets do not give in their Periods and sub-periods
all the good or evil they are able to do by their positions,
assogiations and aspects in the horoseape.

NOTES. |

A planet is inftuenced to do evil or good for various reasons. His

occupation, his owning, association, exaltation, debilitation, retrogra-
des, acoelerations and aspects, hia enemities and friendships have
much to do with the results which he produces upon the native.
Every planetary period begins with its own sub-period and itg{urther ।
minor periods until we reach the minutesk time possible. Several
systems of caloulations of these planetary periods are recommended
in the Astrological works. According to Byihatjataka, a standard

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 43] =====
sairaKACHUNDRIKA: 35

work on Astrology, the period of the most powerful planet in the
Kendras is the firstin order. There is the Vimeotiari (120 years) and
Astottari (108 years) systerig prevalent in Southern and Northern
India respectively. The terms of years ascribed to the planets also
differ. In Southein India Ooduddea of petiods calculated according
to the rising constellation at the time of birth are in vogue, and they
fre easy to determine. In another system the most powerful planet
including the Laygna, begins as the lord of the first period. The
strength of the planets has to be found by the sources of potwer prescrib=
ed in the Astrological works elsewheresuch as the Sthanabala,
Dighala, Kalabala, Viryabala, Chestabala, Nysargikabalaand the various
good and evil Vergas. The reader is referred to niy Etglish fratia-
lation of the Sarwartha Chintamant in the first Chapter for full details
on this important branch of knowledge: Find out the Nakshatra
oF constellations at the time of birth and see how mich of it passed
‘and how much remains. Take the Sun’s potlod which is 6 years.
Thie represents the Sun’s general period. Then we have Vidasa
or sub-period, 3rd we have the Bhookti or sub-sub-period, 4th Antardasa
or sub-sub-subperiod, 5th we have Antarartara or still smaller
division. ‘Then we have the Sookshma or still smaller division and
Prana or the smallest of the planetary sub-divisions enabling us to
make hourly or even half hourly predictions. Take Ravi Dasa 6 years.
The planets have an invariable proportion in the distribution of their
periods and sub-periods. It is seen that the Sun gets 6 years out of 120
years the total of the planetary periods. In the period of 6 yeats,
his sub-period bears the same proportion as his general period bears
in the 120 years. When he has 6 years for 120 years, what will he

have in 6 years ? १४१ years =a years. As the denominator ig

greater we have to reduce the fraction fo months—thus we have
Xi taottat¥ea=3 months and we have }x 30 dayse=18days. The

sub-period of Raviin Ravi’s general perfod fs 3 months and 18 days,
Tn all the other minuter divisions Ravi bears the same coristant
proportion of 6 to 120. Ifwe take Ravi’s sub-sub-period we have
8 }§ months==3f3 x rfsmonths

amy, X focmis X $= Gymonths=

° Xpodaygunt/—=54gdays.
Now if we require further sub-divisions we have to follow the séme

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 44] =====
86 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

rule. Ravi has the same proportion of 6 to 120 years as he ]
in the general period of man's existence.

आत्मसम्बन्धिनो ये च ये ये निजसधर्मिणः ।
तेषामन्तदेशाखेवं दि्न्ति खदशाफलं ॥ २९ ॥
Sranza XX1X.

Planets who are with the lords of the periods, planets
who occupy the houses of the lords of the periods and pla-
nets who are otherwise equal in strength to the lords of the
periods, give similar results as the lords of the periods
themselves, in their periods and sub-periods.

. NOTES.

The Dasa and its Sub-Divisions have to be calculated with refer-
ence to the rising constellation at the time of birth. That is called
the Janma Nakshatra. I have already given the Dasas (Periods of
planets) for the 27 constellations. Krittika at birth commences with
the period of the Sun. In judging of the planetary influences, in
their periods, sub-periods and all the minor divisions, the reader has
to bear in mind the several sources of strength and weakness which
the planets have. If one planet occupies the house of another planet
and the latter is the lord of the period (Dasanatha) then the former
gives results similar to those given by the Dasanatha. Those who
are also in conjunction with the Dasanatha, produce similar results to
him.The owner of the house, occupied by the Dasanatha produces re-
sults similar to the latter. Other planets which are similar in strength
or weakness as the Dasanatha give the same results. Planets are said
to be similar in strength when they occupy houses of the same nature,
or possess lateral, periodical, positional and other advantages detailed
in the Astrological works and to which constant references have al-
ready been made. This is a direction given to the Astrolagical stu-
dent to measure the strength of the planets in producing results, when
their sub-periods and other minute divisions intervene in those of
the general periods. All planets send out light to us though it may
be the reflected solar ray. The effects of a solar ray pure and simple
must be different from the effects of the same ray when reflected

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 45] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 37

from the bodies of other planets, which have an absorbing tendency
to some of the vital powers of the Sun’s rays. The determination of
these effects seems to be the great aim of those astrological writers
and the strength or weakness means the degree of intensity with
which the planetary rays are reflected in their modified forms.

इतरेषां दश्चनाथविरुद्धफल्दायिनां ।
तत्तत्फलानुगुण्येन फलान्यूह्यानिभुक्तिषु ॥ ६० ॥

Sranza XXX.

In the periods and sub-periods of other planets, |
unconnected with the lord of the general Dasa the results
are to be predicted otherwise when they are opposed to him
and inclined to give contrary effects.

NOTES.

In stanza 80 the author stated that in the general period of a
planet we have to expect similar results to him if we get the sub-
periods or other minor divisions of planets who are with him, or in
his house, or who own the house Dasanatha occupies. There must
necessarily be two or three sets of planets in the horoscope of every
man. One set are directly’ connected with the Dasanatha or are
otherwise under his special influence by conjunction, aspect or occu-
pation. There are then some other planets who are directly opposed
to the influences of the lord of the general Dasa and who try always
to give their own or who try to modify the results of the Dasanatha.
There will be a third set whoare partly that way and partly this way,
a sort of indifferent party. The author tries to explain the results
of sub-periods belonging to the planets who are opposing the lord of
the Dasa. When the lord of the Dasa is for giving good health and
the lord of the Bhookti (sub-period) is for producing sickness, what
would be the result? The native becomes indifferent in health. If
Dasanatha is for giving gold and money and the Bhooktinatha is for
stealing it away, the person will be possessed of gold and money and
loses them or will have them in small quantities. If on the other
hand the Lord of the Dasa and Bhookti periods are identical in in-
terests or otherwise agreeable by conjunction or aspects, the native

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 46] =====
88 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

will have much wealth or honor or success with very slight exertions
on his part. Take a worldly example. If out subordinates agree
with us in doing good to a person the person will be easily benefitted,
But when the superiors and the subordinates are at loggerheads the
person who is to be benefitted by them would suffer from want of
agreement between his benefactors. Opposition is always injurious
and must be cleverly overcome.

स्वदशषयां त्रिकोणेसौ qatar |
RIT MMA Teg Trg II 32 Ul
Sranza XXXI.

In. the Dasa of the lord of 5th or 9th houses, who is not
otherwise powerless, the lord of the Ist, 4th, 7th, ahd 10th
houses, though unconnected with the Dasanatha, produces
good. Similarly Bhooktinatha who chances to be owner of one
or more quadrants and who is not otherwise weakened pro-
duces good in the Dasa of the lord who governs 5th and 9th
houses.

 

NOTES.

This stanza is capable of several interpretations. The Dasa of
the lords of the 5th and 9th-has already been declared to be good.
But the lord of the 5th or 9th may also be the lord of 6th, 8th, 12th
or other inauspicious signs, may be in conjuriction with evil planets
may have malicious aspects, and may be debilitated. Here deductions
must be made from the general powers of the lords of 5th and 9th
houses for doing good. Suppose we have the sub-period of a lord of
the quadrants in such a Dasa what will be the result ? The author
says that if the lord ofthe sub-period owns any of the quadrants
(Kendras) and has no evil influences detailed above im the case of the
ruler of the 5th and 9th houses and has mo connection with the
Dasanatha he produces good in his sub-period. The author appa-
rently seems to make no provision in a reverse case.

Take an example. We have the Dasa of a planet who owns any
of the quadrants, and who is otherwise powerful. Does he give us good

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 47] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 89

és the lord of the 5thand 9th houses ? Take again the lord of the
5th or 9th house in the Dasa of a lord of the quadrants. Does he pro-
duce good results if not otherwise powerless ? other cases may also be
put forth. But the reader is referred to the general principles laid down
in the beginning of this work for a solution of these and many similar
difficulties. All planets—good or evil—who own 5th or 9th houses
produce good, while all planets who own quadrants are not declared
as productive of auspicious results. It seems clear that the value of
the planets who rule 5thor 9th house in producing good is greater
than the value of the planets who govern Kendras—1—4—7-10. Benefies
ruling quadrants are producers of evil while malefics governing
Kendras are productive of favourable results. Whether good or evil
planets, they produce good when they own the 5th and 9th houses,

SRY TTT AAA TAT |.

TSAATATTT ATE WT THA: ॥ ३२ ॥
Stanza XXX.

Success comes in the Dasas of death-inflicting planets,
Evil planets in those sub-periods not. only work against this
8166688. but also bring death to the native.

, NOTES.
Lords of 2 and 7 are death-giving planets and these two houses
are called Maraka (death) houses.

The lorda of these houses give suceess in their Dasas. But
when the Bhooktis of evil planets intervene the success predicted will
be negatived and they bring death also. Planeta who are in conjunc-
tion with death-inflicting lerds give prosperity. Those who are not
with them but otherwise favourably disposed will give limited fortune,
and those who. are not in conjunction with them and who are mali-
ciously disposed give ruin and death. The words Evi! planets have two
significations. Guru, Sukra, Poornachundra (full Moon) and well
associated Buda are generally termed good planets or Benefics. While
Sani, Kuja, Ravi, Kshinachundra (New Moon) and badly associated
Buda are called evil planeta or malefics. Good planets are also called

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 48] =====
40 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

evil when they own Ist, 8rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th, and 12th
‘houses, when they have evil aspects, or when they are debilitated or
when they have evil conjunctions. Evil planets may become good
when they are lords of 1st, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, and 10th, houses. Evil
planets are not called good planets or vice versa. We say good pla
nets own evil houses and produce evil and evil planets own
good houses and give good. On the use of the terms evil and good
there isa little confusion even in the sanskrit works. On a closer
study and greater familiarity with the subject the student
will at once see that each of the two words evil and bad when used
with benefics and malefics or vice versa has a limited meaning and
gives no room for confusion. The word Rajayoga is also vaguely
used ; some Astrologers give it a narrowed meaning and make it refer
to only success in political or official life, while others explain it by
saying that it means success in any walk of life and happiness thereby.

 

तत्सम्बन्धि शुभानां च तदापुनर संयुजं ।
श्ुभानान्तु समत्वेन नासंयुम्योगकारिणां ।॥ ३३ ॥

87/24 रदश].

Good planets in conjunction with the lords of the death
inflicting houses give success. These planets when they
are not in conjunction with the above give moderate success
in their sub-periods. Powerful planets give good success in
the Bhookties even when they are not in conjunction with
the owners of the death-inflicting houses.

NOTES.

Stanzas 33 and 84 refer to Dasas and the Bhookties which inter-
vene during them. The Dasa may be generelly good but the sub-
periods of planets which are evil in themselves or of the planets who
are opposed to the influences of the Dasanatha, will not be so very
favourable. Ifthe lord of the general period is good and the lord of
the sub-period is bad, the good of the former is cancelled by the evil
of the latter and the result will be indifferent. If one lord is good and
the other is indifferent, there will be some moderate success, if both
are good the results will be eminently successful, if both are bad, the

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 49] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. . 41.

resul¢s will be disastrous. If.the sub-lorda are in conjunction with the,
major lords, they produce good. If they are not in conjunction but,
good otherwise they produce partial success. If they are bad and not
in conjunction with the Major lords they produce ruin and death

a

शुभस्य स्ववियुक्तस्य दशायां योगकारकाः ।

स्वस्वयुकतिषु चेच्छन्ति कुत्रचिद्योगकारिणां ॥ ३४ ॥ |
^+ शशभ. #

Planets which are disposed to give Rajayoga will.do
80 in their sub-periods, which intervene during the general
periods of planets with-which they are not associated

NOTES. | ` `
The stanza is plain enough. -A planet which becomes good for
‘several reasons wants to produce success to the native. His own Dasa
may not come at all during the life of the person. But the sub-periods
of planets being much shorter in duration may come and go away many
‘times during his life. ‘It has been remarked above that planets in
combination with those who are good will also give success. This
may be due to the purification of his own rays by conjunction with
the purer rays of the nobler planet, or by the rays of the weaker
“planet becoming inactive on account of the superior power of the
rays of the moré exalted one. In either way the resultis auspicious. But
if there is no conjunction between the lords of the general and the sub-
periods ,then the results will be good or bad. according to the nature
of the individual planets whose power is exercised. The sub-period
of a well situated planet will give success in the general period of a
planet with which he is not even united.

i

 

शुभारुटावसंम्बण्धा्वकेगवित्‌
अन्तदंशातुरूपेण भवेतां योगकारकौ ॥ ३५ ॥  . .:.-
Sranza XXXV> ~ i

When Rahh-and Kethu occupy favourable ‘rouses: and
‘are not in conjtnuction with any other plaiets they: givesuc-
b

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 50] =====
42 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

cess in their respective sub-periods according to their rela-
tive strength.

NOTES.

Rahu and Kethu (Dragon’s Head and Dragon’s Tail) have no in-
dependent mansions which they own. They are called shadowy pla-
nets or chaya (Shadow) Grahams (planets) or Thamo (dark) Grahas.
But some of the later writers have given these planets, places of ex-
altation and deblitatation. Exaltation means for good or evil planets,
the state of a planets in a particalur house, where it is capable of
producing the greatest possible good. Debilitation means the op-
posite state. These two states of exaltation and debilitation are
called Oocha and Neecha respectively in sanskrit. In the latter state
the planet willbe inclined to do the greatest possible harm to the
native. When a planet is in full glory the rays seem to haves
peculiar effect in producing much success and happiness. When the
planet is eclipsed or its rays are greatly disturbed and modified for
worse, they become useless and produce misery and failures. From
Mesha to Kanya Rahu is considered powerful and he tries to do good.
From Thula to Meena Kethu is good and gives success. Vrishabha
(Taurus) is specially strong for Rahu while Vrischika (scorpio) is 80
considered for Kethu. There are some differences in ascribing houses
of exaltation and debilitations and I shall represent the most approved
doctrine here without entering into unnecessary details. |

|

 

पापाया दश्ानायाः श्ुभानांतदसंयुजां ।
भुक्तयः पापफल्दा स्तत्सयुक्लुभयुक्तयः ॥ २६ ॥

भवन्ति मिश्रफल्दा युक्तयो योगकारिणाम्‌ ।
अत्यन्त पापफल्दा भवन्ति तदसंयुजाम्‌ ॥ ३७ ॥
Sranzas XXXVI & XXXVII.

If the lords of the Dasa are evil and the lords of the
sub-period are favourable but unconnected with them, they
produce evil. If the favourable lords of the sub-periods

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 51] =====
JATAKACHUNDRILA. - 43

join the Dasanathas they produce indifferent results. Power-
ful planets who are not in conjunction with the lords of
Dasas who are evil produce very unfavourable results.

Planets who are capable of giving Yogam and who are
not connected with the lords of the Dasas will give good
results in their subperiods during such Dasas.

NOTES.

Again the idea seems to be repeated. It may be to make the
matter more emphatic that the author is laying much stress on this
point. There is however a nice distinction drawn by the author. He
seems to make a difference between good planets Shubhagrahas and
planets which are said to be powerful or yoga karakas. The meaning
of the latter expression seems ‘to be that those planets which are not
good in nature, but become powerful by association or otherwise are
called yoga karakas. Guru, Sukra, Poornachundra,‘ and well asso-
ciated Buda are called Shubhagrahas. But when they are debilitated,
badly associated, or occupying evil houses they producé evil and may
be called evil planets. But there is the general term evil applicable
to Kuja, Ravi, Sani, badly associated Buda and Kshinachundra along
with-Ravi and Kethu. These also may produce good or bad accor-
ding as they own good or evil houses, combine with good or evil
planets, and have exaltations or debilitations. Therefore Shubha-
grahams are different from Yogakarakagrahams.

. The distinction deserves to be specially remembered as the
Phalam (results) to be predicted depends largely upon these consi-
derations. Sani for instance can own 9th and 10th houses and then
becomes very powerful, and if also exalted and well associated he
will produce splendid results. So also any other evil planet. Under
these circumstances he will be called a yogakaraka planet and not a
Shubhagraha. If Guru owns 8thand 11th houses he becomes evil
and produces bad. The author seems to have three different cases
under contemplation in the treatment of Dasas and Bhookties. (1).
Where the lords of the periods are evil and the lords of the sub-
periods are favourable and not in conjunction with them the result
will be unfavourable. (2). Where they join the lords of the Periods
they produce indifferent résults. (3). Where the lords of the sub-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 52] =====
4५4 + JATAKACHUNORIKA,

periods are Powerfy]-and are not in conjunction with the Dasanathas
they ‘produce very unfavourable results. The.conjunction, of: even
evil planets seems ta mitigate the bad.they. would otherwise. inflict
on the native. These cases must be clearly distinguished in consulta-
tiotis of horoscopes, and in the subseqiient prediction’ of results.

A little repetition I am afraid occurs here. The idea is already |
explained in the previous verse, Planets unconnected with the lord
of the Dasa will give good if they are otherwise powerful, during their |
sub-period’. Here the author seems to particularise the time when |
those planets who are not in conjunction with the lord of the general |
Dasa will produce good. The time indicated is the sub-period which |
intervenes during the Dasa of the planet with whom the lord of the
Bhookti is not associated. It must be remembered that this isa
small work in which at most, only the barest outlines of astrology
could be given. All the details of the complicated Astrological
acience are not possible to. be clearly enumerated in a work which is
gnly elementary in its nature and therefore the readers must have
yesort to other comprehensive treaties to make certain prediction
Predictions are the fruits of the Astrological sciences and they ara
therefore the hardest to produce. Primers treating of Botany, Physics
Physiology, Chemistry, Geology, Biology or Psychology cannot
pretend to be exhaustive and are generally more intended to rouge the
curiosity of the students for making deeper studies in those branches
knowledge than to be thé sure guides on which the greatest con-
fidente could at once be placed. From the very elementary nature. of
fick books, they must be considerably defective and generally super

lal, '

सत्यपि स्वेनसम्बन्धे न हन्ति छुभभुक्तिषु ।
ˆ -इन्त्यसत्यपिसम्बन्धे मारकःपापभुक्तिषु ॥ ३८ ॥
86०28. इषा

The lord of the Period who has jurisdiction to inflict
death does not do so in the sub-periods of favourable pla:
nets who are in conjunction with him. --He-causesa death in

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 53] =====
JATARACHUNPRIEA. 45

the subperiods of malifics.who: wre not in conjunction with
him, ~+ ४.५ ` 2 @ Was ; १ ag 8 hee
८९ . NOTES. षष्ठः ऊ ६ %
There are two combinations contemplated here and they mist be
specially borne in mind. First we have to determine who is the
most Painful planet to inflict death and then if his general Period is -
long we have next to determine in whose Bhookti death is caused.
Life is the most important question for any person and therefore his
longevity must first be considered and determined. Then the good
and bad results in his life have to be predicted. Prospects ‘in‘life
have no value whatever unless we know the length of the span of
our existence. The author says that in the Dasa of the Maraka
planet, the Bhookti of the favourable planet who is in conjunction with
him does not produce death, but the Bhookti of the evil planet
who is not in conjunction with the Dasanatha will produce: certain
death. The question may then be raised as to whether the Bhookti
of the evil planet. who is in conjunction with the Maraku Dasanatha
produces death or favourable results ? From a careful” perusal of the
above verses it appears clear that the periods and -sub-periods of even
the worst planets ‘when they are in- conjunction with each other do
not inflict such evil as the periods and sub-period of planets who aré
not in conjunction with each other, Therefore there is some good in
the very act of conjunction or combination which should not, be lost
sight of by the student of Astrology when he attempts'to make his
predictions. I have already stated the results of the sub-periods of the
favourable planets when they are not in conjunction with the planets
whose periods govern the native for the time being

५ +
——

arent Zarate स्वपुक्तौसौरिभागेवौ ।
अदिती sree freer AT २९ ॥ ` *
8५28 दा ५

‘rod Veming and saturn (शिश्काय १.४०) हा ¢ &००१ ०४ ४९
results in their respective periods and suh-periods inversely

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 54] =====
46 JSATAKACHUNDRIKA.

NOTES.

These two planets seem to have a peculiar affinity and produce |
good or evil in an intense form inversely in thier Dasas and Bhookties.
If Sani is good and his Dasa governs man, the Bhookti of Sukra, when
he is well disposed, produces much excellent results. The author
says that even if there are other Bhookties equally favourable like
that of Sukra they will not produce such splendid results as Sukra can
do, Thus in the Dasas of Sani and Sukra and their sub-periods inter-
vening them, the greatest fortune may be expected if they are favour-
ably disposed. Whatever may be the occupation of the planets or their
association, Sani and Sukra will produce the most intense effects
during their periods and sub-periods, which no other two planets |
could produce. The author has taken us far into the fields of Astro- |
logy and has shown by brief but very expressive stanzas the results |
of many principles guiding the life of the creature. He has shown
the relative merits of the planets, the periods of successes and failu- |
res, the principles on an examination of which death may safely be
predicted and a general survey of the other items which give strenth
or weakness to the planets. These are all general results and now
in the 40th stanza and the subsequent ones, he is going to make a
summary of the results, which the native born in each of the 12 Zodi-
cal signs, is likely to enjoy. This will help the student at once to see
which of the planets are favourable and which are not in judgingof |
the different lagnas in which people are born.

 

Stanza XL.

भतिलग्रं समालक्ष्य पूवोदिष्टा विरोधतः
तत्तत्हस्वरूपाणि क्रमेणैव बिदप्महे ॥ ४० ॥

We shall now:speak of the different evil and good
prospects which the’planets give in the Zodiacal signs from
Mesha (Aries) to Meena (Pisces). These good and bad re-
sults will be in conformity with the principles, whieh have
already been explained by us before. .

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 55] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA- 47

NOTES.

In the first thirty nine stanzas of his work the author has tried to
explain briefly the general principles of Astrology and they will be now
summarised as it were for the convenience of the readers. There are
12 Zodiacal signs and he will give the principal good and bad results
which accrue from the different planetary combinations in each of
these 12 houses. Which planets are good in Mesha (Aries), which
are bad, and whose combinations produce Raja Yoga (political suc-
cess) whose conjunction inflicts misery, and who are likely to produce
death and in whose period and sub-period, these and similar points
are determined with reference to each of the houses and each of the
planets; and therefore we request the astrological students to carefully
follow the author in the important stanzas which are given for their
guidance. Of the several works which the translator had read on As-
trology, he has much confidence in the working out of the general
principles laid down here, as they will be amply verified at every step
of the reader in the line of his prediction.

मन्दसोम्य सिताः पापाः शुभौ गुरु दिवाकरौ ।
aad योगमात्रेण भभवेच्छनिजीवयोः ॥ ४१ ॥
Sranza XLI Mesha—Aries.

A Person born in Mesha Lagna (Aries as birth time)
has Sani, Buda and Sukra ill disposed towards him.
Guru and Ravi are auspicious. The Simple combination of
Guru and Sani produces no beneficial results.

NOTES.

Here the author has drawn attention of the readers to 3 most
important pointe to be consulted in estimating the good and evil re-
sults which are likely to happen tothe person born while Mesha is
rising at the time of birth. Sukra isthe lord of the 2nd and 7th
houses, Buda is the lord of the 3rd and 6th houses, and Sani is the
Lord of the 10th and 11th’ houses. -: Of course, it has already been
pointed out in the earlier portions of this work; that the Lords of the

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 56] =====
48 JATAKACHUNDRIKA; “ .

8rd, 6th, 8th, 11th, and 12th, houses are bad. Therefore Buda being
the Lord of the 8rd and.6th houses to the person..who,is -.born in
Mesha, becomes evil. Sukra owns 2nd and 7th houses. Good plapets
owning quadrants are evil and 7th is one of the quadrants. Sani
owns 10th.& 11th houses of which, the 11th is bad while the 10th
house (quadrant) owned by an evil planet like Sani is good. Buda
is perfectly bad, but in the cases of Sukra and Sani, out of the two
houses each of those planets owns, one is evil and the other good.
But Buda, Sani, and Sukra are not friends of the Lord of Mesha.
viz., Kuja or Mars. This point is fully explained in the Astrologi-
cal Self Instructor and Primer published by me in English.
Guru and Ravi are declared to be good. Ravi owns the 5th house
from Mesha and Guru owns the 9th and 12th houses.. It has been
already shown that: the Lords of the trines (angular points of an equi-
lateral triangle) are productive of good results. Ravi owns’ only one
house and he is perfectly good, but Guru owns 9th as well-as_ the
12th of which 9th is good and twelfth is bad. Guru, Ravi, and Kuja
(Lord of Mesha) are friends and thus though Guru owns one of the
evil houses, he will, in the main, prodtice good and notevil. The 8rd
point the author réfers to is the ‘nouproduction. of the Raja Yoga by
the combinations of the Lords of the 9th and 10th ‘houses. This
sounds contraty to his own: declared’ ‘principles .enuniiiated in
Stanza 16 of this work, where he says that Rajayogam is produced by
the combination of the Lords of the quadrants and trinés. But in the
case of these two plancts, they not only own 9th & 10th “houses,
whote combination ought to praduce good, but they are also Lords of
the 12th and 11th houses, whosé combination acts -againstthe pro-
duction of the Rajayogam (vide p. 24). Therefore,: the author. . says
clearly that to the person born in Mesha, the simiple conjunction of
Sani and Guru is alone not sufficient to produce political success. We
inust look to other combinations for Rajayoga.: The line of argument I
“adopt is simple enough and the reader is earnestly requested to note
its force in making his ‘predictions when hé consults: horoscopes. ` ` `

षट्ंतु तेन जीवस्य प्रापत्वमापि सिध्यति । . . ` . `.
कविस्साक्षाभहन्तास्यान्भारकस्वेन रक्षिते ।। ४४. ।+

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 57] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 49

Sranza. XLII.

But on the other hand Guru when combined with Sani,
not only does not give good but will actively produce evil.

Sukra does not himself kill the native although he possesses
death-inflicting powers.

NOTES.

It was pointed out (vide stanza 41) that Guru being the lord of
the 9th and 12th houses, has both good and bad combined within
himself.

In the combination of Sani and Guru the author asked us not
to expect any good results, and he here tells us that there will be evil
in their combination especially on the part of Guru. This requires
aclear explanation. Let us take an example. We know that.a planet
has good and evil influences due to various causes explained in the
astrological works. If a planet is capable of giving one rupee worth
of good and also one rupee worth of evil, the result will be that the
planetary influence is neutral—good cancelling the evil. However,
the astrological writers assure us that the result is not only not
neutral, but is bad. They are of opinion that when good and evil
influences of a planet are equal we must predict evil, but in a milder
form. Remembering then this principle of their explanation, we shall
see why Guru is bad in the combination with Sani. Guru owns
9th and 12th houses, of which the 12th for Guru and 11th
for Sani are evil houses. Here the evil is equal to the good these
two planets have, as one of the two houses each planet owns is
good while the other is bad. We can understand that the com-
bination is bad, but why should Guru be particularly declared bad
in producing evil in the combination, while Sani also contributes to
bring about the combined evil result? Guru is an auspicious planet by
nature and evil influences seem to affect him more ; Sani is an evil pla-
net and good influences seem to make him better. Guru owns one
good and one bad house, and they neutralize each other’s effects, but
he has an evil association viz., of being in conjunction with Sani.
There is therefore something more than good’and bad counteracting
each other and Guru is declared to produce evil, because he has evil
combination. But Sani has a better prospect. His owning good and

८

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 58] =====
50 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

evil houses counterbalances the two results, but he is in conjunction
with Guru, a declared good planet, and his position is improved.
Therefore in the combination of Sani and Guru we see that the result
is bad and that Guru is able todo more harm than Sani. Sukra
owns the 2nd and the 7th houses and these two are called death-
inflicting houses. Ifa planet owns one death-inflicting house it is
enough to predict evil results, but when he owns two death-inflicting
houses, we should naturally expect to see that he willkill the person
undoubtedly. But though Sukra has jurisdiction to kill by govern-
ing the 2 houses, 2nd and 7th, he will not kill the native himself but
will hand over the person to others who are also ill-disposed towards
the person born in Mesha and who would do the execution work.

मन्दादयो निहन्तारो भवेयुः पापिनो ग्रहाः
छुभाञ्चम फलान्येवं ब्ञातव्यानि क्रियाभुवः ॥ ४२ ॥

87^प2^ शाना.

Evil planets like Sani &c., will cause death to the
person ; try and find out the results good and bad which
might happen to the person born in Mesha carefully and
with reference to the principles of astrology.

NOTES.

Just in the previous stanza we pointed out that when Guru and
Sani combine together Guru will inflict evil. Now we have to deter-
mine who will kill the native. The author says “evil planets like
Sani &.” He takes Sani first and includes Buda and occa-
sionally Chundra. Buda is bad, as he owns third and sixth houses.
But Chundra is the lord of 4th. If he is full then, he will be classified
az good and his owning one of the quadrants is bad and he may, by
evil combinations, produce death. But if he is weak, then his owning
the quadrant is auspicious and he will do good. These then are the
planets who determine the death of the person born while the sign
Mesha (Aries) is rising at the time of birth. I have given notes at
considerable length, but the fuller the explanations offered even at the
risk of repetition, the better it is for beginners who read these

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 59] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 51

works and who, I am sure, will be very much profited by the
information given by me herein

The author has already shown us very briefly indeed, what are
the general principles of Astrology, how they have to be mastered and
with what restrictions they have to be applied. But in a small work
of this nature it is not possible for him to explain anything more than
the barest outlines of Astrology, and those who are conversant with
the Sanskrit language will find what an amount of brevity could be
introduced in the Stanzas relating to Sciences in Sanskrit. He takes
Sani as the most prominent planet for inflicting death, as he owns ©
the 10th and 11th houses but really Buda could have been named with
an &., afterwards. Buda ownsthe 3rd and 6th houses and consequent-
ly ranks as the foremost evil planet toa person born in Mesha,
because the two houges are bad and he is also a bad planet when his
associations are evil. Why should Sani be then named ?, is a ques-
tion that we might easily ask the author. Perhaps if he were alive
he would have answered thus his readers. Sani owns 10th and 11th
houses, Sani ig the lord of longevity and Sani has an inclination to
kill persons in preference to other planets whether preceding or
following him in his periods or sub-periods. We refer the readers to
Stanza 28th and notes on it. 10th house owned by an evil planet is
productive of good, and it is the last angle of the quadrant and there-
fore ia considéred the strongest. In the same way the owning of the
11th house by an evil or good planet is productive of evil and as 11th
is the last house among the 3rd, 6th, 8th, and 11th houses the fact of
owning it confers the strongest tendency to produce evil. Sani is the
Auyushkarake or lord of life and therefore if he is well disposed he
will increase the term of life and if ili disposed he will cut short the
life. The influences of evil or good planeta are of two kinds. First
we have the general influence spreading among the different influ-
ences of the other planets and lasting all through the life of a person,
this is called Nisargika or permanent. Second, we have the influ-
ences of the planets in their periods, sub-periods, and other minor
divisions of life. These are called Thathkalika local or temporary,
The latter influences last only during their respective divisions or
sub-divisions. Here also the influences of the other planets cannot
be overlooked. These two results of the planetary influences, must

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 60] =====
52 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

not be confounded with each other and must be distinctly borne in
mind. As Sani has a special jurisdiction to protect life and take it
away, his name has been inserted by the author in preference to
others. If he is bad, it is only then that we have to give him the
power to cut short the life. Otherwise the death-time must be deter-
mined in the period or sub-period of other planets. The author
further says that it is necessary to reconcile the principles of Astrology
whenever any difference is found among them and if the student is
only intelligent and careful, he will see that practically there is no
~ difference among the various systems advocated by the astrological
writers. .

 

जीवदुकरेन्दवः पापः श्ुभौ शनि दिवाकरौ ।

राजयोग करस्साक्नादेक एवां शुमत्सुतः ॥ ४४ ॥

Stanza XLIV. Vrishabha-Taurus.

To the person born in Vrishabha (Taurus) Lagnam,
Guru, Sukra and Chundra are evil planets ; Sani and Ravi
are good planets. “Sani alone is capable of giving Raja-
yogam to the person born in Vrishabhalagnam.

NOTES. ^

Gurn is the lord of 8th and 11th houses both of which: are de-
clared bad. Sukra is the lord of Ist and 6th houses and these are
bad, as the first is a quadrant, and when owned by a benefic the result
isevil. Sixth house is equally bad, Chundra ‘is the lord of the third
house and it is bad. So that Guru, Chundra, Sukra are bad planets
because they own 8th and 11th, 1st and 6th and 3rd houses - respec-
tively. These are bad planets and they always try to do evil to the na-
tive. The author then begins to tell us who are good planets for per-
sons born in Vrishabha. Ravi owns the 4th house and as he is evil and
owns one of the quadrants he becomes good and produces beneficial
influences. Sani is the lord of 9th and 10th houses and the possession
of those two houses in one planet is excellent. Hence he becomes the
most influencial planet in the horoscope of thenative born in Vrishabha
and produces the gratest good and Rajayogam.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 61] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. ् 53

जीवादयोग्रहाः पापाः घ्रन्ति मारकलक्षणाः
बुषैस्तत्तत्फलान्येवं ङ्ेयानि दषजन्मनः ॥ ४५ ॥

87424. उ.प

If evil planets like Guru &c., are possessed of death-
inflicting powers they will kill the native born in Vrishabha
in their respective periods and sub-periods.
NOTES.

Guru now figures prominently ‘as.the death-inflicting lord to
the person born while Vrishabha is rising at the time of birth. Why
should Guru be named, and not other evil planets who have also
been declared to be inauspicious as inflicting death ? Chundra owns
the third house and is bad. Sukra owns the lst and 6th houses, of
which 6th is bad, while the first becomes bad by reason of.its being
owned by a benefic like Sukra. He is besides the lord of the birth
and has some consideration for the life of the person born under his
own influence, Guru owns 8th and 11th houses and is the declared
enemy of the lord of birth and has none of the redeeming points to
alleviate the evilheis capable of doing to the personbornin Vrishabha.
He owns two evil houses while Chundra owns only one evil house ;
Guru, therefore,is stronger than Chundra and also Sukra in producing
evil. But in determining the evil or good which might result from
the influences of the planets we cannot be too careful in weighing
the evidence produced before us, and the facts have to be very nicely
balanced before we pronounce our judgment in the matter. Guru,
if well situated and aspected, may not inflict death. The student
has to read well and digest facts.

भौमजीवारुणाः प्राणाः एक एव शुभःकविः ।
श्नैश्दरेणजीवस्य योगोमेष भुवो ययो ॥ ४६ ॥
Sranza. XLVI. Mithuna—Gemini. °

Kuja and Guru are inauspicious to the person born
in Mithuna (Gemini) Sakra is alone good. Combination of

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 62] =====
54 + JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

Sani and Guru produces the same results as have been
stated in ihe previous stanza for persons born in Mesha.
NOTES.

This stanza is followed by 47-48-49 which slightly differ from
the general principles laid down here. This difference is called Ma-
tantaram or separate doctrine. I shall explain fully after those slokas.
are given.

rns

कुजभान्विन्दवः पापाः TH TT Garrat: |

„ राजयोग करौ शुक्र सोमपुत्रौ श्ुभान्वितौ ॥ ४७ ॥
क्षनिर्जीव समायोगात्फखमेष भुबोययथा |
श्लनिस्साक्षान्नहन्तास्यान्मारकत्वेन क्षितः ॥ ४८ ॥
भौमादयो निहन्तारो भवेयुः पापिनो ग्रहाः ।
छभाष्वम फलान्येवं ज्ञातम्यान्युगजन्मनः ॥ ४९ ॥

| "त 47-48-49

ि नि 0, 1 1. का. ।
alone is good. If Sukra and Buda are well associated they
give Rajayoga (47).

When Sani joins Guru, the result will be similar to
what they produce on the person born in Mesha. Sani will
not directly kill the person even when possessed of death
inflicting powers, (48).

Kuja and other evil planets become powerful in in-

flicting death. : These results have to be carefnlly found |

out for persons born in Mithuna (49)
NOTES. :
In Stanza 46 the author says Kuja and Guru are bad. Kujs
. pwns 6th and 11th houses. Both are bad for any planet to own,
Guru is evil because he owns 7th and 10th (vide notes to Stanza 6).

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 63] =====
r JATAKACHUNDRIKA: 55

Sukra owns 5th and 12th houses and isa friend of the lord of
, Mithuna (Buda) and he is entirely good. Sani owns 8th and 9th
J houses, 8th is bad (vide P. 9). 9th is auspicious.

Combination of the lords of Kendras and Thrikonas is product-
ive of Rajayogam (vide P. 14). Combination of Guru and Sani pro-
duces no Rajayoga for reasons well explained under Mesha Lagna
(vide Stanza 42). In Stanzas 47-48-49 the author introduces
Chundra as inauspicious. This introduction of Chundra lord of the
2nd house is called Matantara. The owning of the 2nd house: has
not been declared to be bad. anywhere by the author. Chundra and
Ravi own each only one house while the rest of the five planets own
each two houses. In stanza7 the author says that the’ lords
of the 2nd and 12th give good or bad as their conjunction is good or
bad and the nature of the houses they occupy. Then why should
Chundra be called bad here, without knowing anything about his
conjunction and the nature of the house he occupies? Chundra and
Buda are also not such inveterate enemies. The author anticipates

. two positions for Chundra. The two best houses for Chundra are

' Vrishabha where he is exalted and Kataka which is his own. If
Chundra is in Vrishabha, he will be in the 12th house from Mithuna
and is therefore bad. If he is in Kataka he will be in a Maraka house
which is also bad. On these accounts he must have been declared to
be bad. Sani will not kill himself even when he has Maraka powers.
The reason is he owns 9th, a very good house. Kuja and other evil
planets kill the person. Kuja owns 6th and 11th, Ravi 8rd, and Guru
7th and 10th. All theseare bad and enable their lords to kill the
person born in Gemini. Guru certainly is bad if armed with death
powers. In the explanation of these points it is not possible for me
to take the reader into the labrynth of the astrological formulas. It
can only be pierced through by a little perseverance and energy.
A few months’ study will familiarise these apparently difficult points
and the formulas can easily be kept. for ready reference by a well
balanced mind.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 64] =====
=¬

56 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

श्ुकमन्द बुधाः पापाः विदुधिषण भूसुतौ ।
राजयोग करस्साक्षादेक एव धरासुतः ॥ ५० ॥

भवेतां राजययोगस्य कारकौ गुरुभूमिजौ ।
रविस्साक्षाननहन्तास्यान्मारकत्वेन लक्षितः ॥ ५१ ॥

्ुक्रादयो निहन्तारो भवेयुः पापिनोग्रहाः । `
कुलीरसम्भवस्यैवं फलान्यूह्यानि सूरिभिः ॥ ५२ ॥
Stanza 50—51—52. Kataka Lagna.

Sukra, Sani, and Buda are evil for persons born in
Kataka (Cancer) ; Guru and Kuja are also evil. Kuja is alone
capable of giving Raja yoga (50).

The combination of Guru and Kuja gives to the Native
Rajayoga (Political success). Ravi does not kill himself
although possessed of death-inflicting powers (51).

Sukra and other inauspicious planets kill the person
bornin Kataka. We must judge of these results by the
principles laid down in Astrology by the learned (52).

NOTES.

Sukra, Buda and Sani are evil. Guru and Kuja are also evil.
Kuja alone is considered to be able to give Rajayoga. The combina-
tion of Kuja and Guru produces Rajayoga. Here apparently there
seems to be an error in the transcription of the original work. The
statement that Buda, Sukra, and Sani are evil to the native born in
Kataka, is intelligible enough. Even Guru may be said to be evil, for
he owns 6th and 9th out of which the 6th house is bad, Kuja owns
the 5th and 10th houses and is the only auspicious planet
for Kataka lLagnam. How could he produce evil when
the two houses he owns are good and when he is the friend
of Chundra, lord of Kataka? Of courseif we go to the length of
finding a farfetchedcausein Kuja being Neecha in Kataka—it may
be imagined that he may not be able to do good. But this does not

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 65] =====
चै

JATAKACHUNDRIKA 67

seem to be relevant or te have been ceneeived by the auther. Then
what is the best thing to be done ? The originals with me contain
Dhishana Bhoosatou—-Which means Guru and Kuja: May the last
word be not Bhaskarow.the Sun. That would quite fit the prosody and
would certainly improve thesense, Any how in my humble opinion,
I could not agree with the author if I am asked to read Kuja as also
being an evil planet. Lords of Thrikonas are always good and
Kuja is the lord of the 5th house. Evil planets are good if they own
Kendras and Kuja is an evil planet. Besides the author will be thorough-
ly contradicting himself in what he says in stanza 11 (vide notes
on P. 12). ‘Kujadsan evil planet owning the last Kendra 10th
is the most auspicious. This statement of the author is simply in-
explicable and in the next sentence we have the author explaining
that Kuja is the only planet who is able to give Réjayoga. Guru
owns two houses 6th and 9th, of which the last gives him good. The
good given by the 9th house may be cancelled by the evil produced
by the ownership of the 6th. When. évil and good are equal or balanc~
ing we have to predict. evil but in amild form. .There are other
works which lay down the principle that when a planet owns one
good arid one evil house, he may be classed asa good planet perhaps
in amild form. This view is different from that of the author of
this work and I have simply drawn the attention of the readers te
such differences in opinions on astrological poimts. Ravi is the lord
ofthe 2nd house and he will not kill the native himself. Why ? perhaps
he is the friend of Chundra arid he does not like to get the blame
himself. Sukra’and other evil planets when’ possessed of Maraka
powers, kill the person during their periods and sub-periods.

Sukra owns 4th and 11th,the first bad because Sukra is’ a benefic:
and his owning a quadrant is bad. The 11th is had and Sukra owns
it. Sani owns the 7th and 8th, of which the lordship of 7th gives him.
good while that of 8th produces evil. Buda is the lord of 8rd and 12th
houses and he is necessarily bad. Cancer is an auspicious Lagna
itself and when the Moon occupies it with Guru whois ‘exalted here;
great success will be produced. Itisa watery sign and generally:
makes men stout and generous. The great Indian National hero:
Rama was born in Kataka with Chundra and Guru there, Sani in Thula’
= in Makara, Sukra in Meena, Ravi in Mesha and Buda in, Vri-.

ha,

—_—_

d

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 66] =====
58 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

मन्दसौम्य सिताः पापाः कुज एव शुभावहः ।
भभवेद्योगमात्रेण नञ्युभं गुरुचुक्रयोः ॥ ५३ ॥
गुरुभुक्तो यदा भौमः विरोषफलदायकः ।
बुधस्साक्षा्नहन्तास्यान्मारकत्वेन रक्षितः ॥ ५४ ॥
घ्रन्तिसौम्यादयः पापाः मारकत्वेन लक्षितः ।

एवं फलानि ब्ेयानि सिम्दजस्य मनीषिभिः ॥ ५५ ॥

Sranzas 53—54—55 Simha Lagna (Leo). —

Sani, Sukra, and Buda are evil. Kuja alone is good
The combination of Sukra and Guru alone will not produce
Rajayoga (53)

When Kuja joins Guru the combination produces much

good. Sani does not kill the native himself when he is en-
dowed with Maraka powers (54).

Buda and other evil planets kill the person born in
Simha, when they have Maraka powers. The wisemen after
good consultation must predict these results to the person
born in Simha (56).

NOTES.

Sukra owns 8rd and 10th houses and both are bad. Buda owns
the 2nd and 11th houses, the last is a bad one, hence the 1st also be-
comes bad. Sani owns 6th and 7th houses of which 6th is bad while
the ownership of the 7th gives good. But Ravi, Lord of Simha, is |
opposed to the influence of Sani and he is said to be his inveterate
enemy. Kuja is the best because he owns 4th, a Kendra and 9th,
Trikona. This combination of Kendras and Konas is very excellent,
but the combination must be the combination of the last Kendra
10th andthe last Kona 9th. Guru owns 5th a good house and
8tha bad house. But when he joins with Kujathere will be |
Rajayoga. Sani will not killthe person because there is some
good in him. But Sukra and Buda are thoroughly evil. The author

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 67] =====
&
JATAKACHUNDRIEA. 59

is silent about Chundra. He owns the 12th from Simha, and.
the Lord of the 12th is good ar bad according to circumstances (Vide
p. 8). Chundra isa friend of Ravi. My own humble view by long
experience isthat when Chundra is weak and is unfavourably situated
there is nothing to prevent him, from killing the party himself.
However this opinion is modestly put forward from a general know-
ledge of astrology, and not warranted by any statement made by the .
author of this work. I am responsible for this view and I think when
evil is predicted in the Chundra Dasa when he is weak etc.,—the pre-
diction will surely be verified.

जीवशुकरेन्दवः पापाः एकोश्गुसुतश्छुभः।

राजयोगकरस्सोम्यो भरगुपु्रसमन्वितः ॥ ५६ ॥

निहन्तिकविरन्येतु मारकाख्याः ङुजादयः।

घनन्ति पापाः शुभान्यह्यान्येवं कन्या भुवो बुः ॥ ५७॥
Stanza 56,57. Kanya Lagna (Virgo).

Sukra, Chundra, Guru and Kuja are evil to the person
born in Kanya (Virgo). Sukraalone gives good. Buda and
Sukra when in conjunction produce Rajayoga (57). Ravi
does not [स] the person himself. Kuja and others who are
evil kill the native. In this way the learned judge of these
results—good and bad—after careful consideration. (58).

NOTES. |

There are two expressions—Kaviranyatie other than Kavi or
Sukra and Raviranyatie other than Ravi or the Sun. There seems to
be some confusion in these two stanzas. How can Sukra be called evil
and again in the same breath be called good.

Guru is bad because he owns 4th and 7th houses. Chundra is bad
as he owns 11th house. Kujais not mentioned. The Stanza should
begin Kuja jeevandavahpapaha and then everything will be alright.
Kuja owns 8rd and 8th houses both of which are bad. Sukra is
good because he owns 2nd and 9th houses, and he is also called bad by

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 68] =====
69 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

the author. This is contradicted by. himself in the next half of the
Stanza by saying that Sukra alone is good because he is the Lord of
the 9th. The original works seem to have undergone many changes
of this nature before they have been transmitted to us. However,
following the author, we see that Kuja is bad, becanse he owns 8rd
and 8th houses both of which are bad. The conjunction of Sukra and
Buda who is the lord of birth seems to be necessary for Rajayogam.
Chundra is also bad because he owns the Lith house and is bad.
Buda is the lord of the Ist and 10th houses and therefore the combi-
nation between himself and Sukra, the lord of the ninth is considered
to be very auspicious. This has already been explained so many times
that it needs no further reiteration, Inthe first portion ef the stanza
under inauspicious planets, Ravi’s name is omitted. Ravi owns the
twelfth house and we have seen that the lord of the twelfth is. bad. In
inflicting death hisname comesin. That is he himself does not kill
the native even when he is possessed of death-inflicting powers, Kuja
and others kill the native. Guru owns two quadrants 4th and 7th
and both of them are bad. He is also as powerful as Kuja to kill
the person. So also Chundra who owns 11th honse. `

जीवाकं मदिनाः पापाः अनैस्वरबुधौ शुभौ ।
 राजयोगकरस्साक्षादेक एवांशुमत्सुतः ॥ ५८ ॥
भवेतां राजयोगस्य कारका इन्ुतत्सुतौ #
कुजस्साक्षानहन्तास्यान्मारकवेन रक्षितः ॥ ५९ ॥
जीवादयोनहन्तारो भवेयुः पापिनोग्रहाः ।
शुभाश्चभफलान्येवं ज्ञातव्यानि तुलाभुवः ॥ ६०.॥
Sranzas. 58, 59, 60. hula Lagna (Libra).

To the person born in Thula, Guru, Ravi, and. Kuja
are inauspicious. Buda and Sani are productive of good. Sani
alone is capable of giving Rajayogam (58).

The combination of Chundra and Buda produces Raja
yogam. Kuja himself will not kill the person born in Thula
even when possessed of death-inflicting powers (59).

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 69] =====
JATAK AGHUNDRIKA. ^ 61

Guru and other evil! rlanets kill the petson when poss-
essed of death-inflictiag powers ; the good and bad results
must be carefully predicted to persons born in Thula (60)

NOTES.

Guru, Ravi and Kuja are declared to be evil. Guru owns third
and sixth houses, both of which are bad, and their Lord therefore is
ill-disposed, Kuja owns the two death houses, second and the
seventh. The Lord of a quadrant, when hechances to be an evil
planet, is good, and I don’t see why the author should class Kuja as
evil. He stated nowhere that the Lord of the second is bad. He
has said in the beginning of this work that the 2nd and 7th are death-
inflicting houses and therefore their Lords must be presumed to be
bad. And when he says that Kuja is bad for persons born in Thula,
perhaps he means that as Kuja owns the two death-inflicting houses
he is bad. Ravi is the Lord of the 11th house. And we have already
been told that the Lord of the 11th house is evil, Sani and Buda are
good. Sani is the Lord of the 4th and 5th houses and the combina--
tion of these two houses by one and the same planet is highly produc.
tive of good. This combination however is not so good:as the combi-
nation of the Lord of the 9th and 10th houses. Buda is the Lord of
the 9th and 12th houses of which the Lordship of the 9th is good,
while the Lordship of the 12th. ik bad. But Budais a great friend
of Sukra, the Lotd ofthe sign Thnia This strengthens the good
feeling between them and Buda declares himself ‘in favour: of persons
born in his friend’s houses. Sani alone is capable of giving Rajayogam,
Chundra and Buda; when combined produce much Rajayogam: Kuja
himself does not kill the person even when heis possessed of death-
inflicting powers. Guru and other evil planets kill the person born
in Thula, when they are possessed of death-inflicting powers. Kuja
has. been declared to be not able:to kill the person himself. Chundra
js the Lord of the 10th-house while Buda is the Lord of the 9th house.
We have it elsewhere distinctly stated that the combination of the
Lords of the 9th and 10th is productive of good. In the case of the
combination of Chundra and Buda, the author seems to have noted
some difference. In:the beginning of these stanzas he saya that,
Sani alone is able to give Rajayogam. In the case of Sani, he be-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 70] =====
62 JATAKACAUNDRIKA.

comes perfectly good as the two houses he owns are the 4th and 5th
and both are good. But in the case of Buda and Chundra, there is
some difference. Chundra, it is true, is the Lord of the 10th house
and as he is Lord of one house he becomes good if he is in combina-
tion with the Lord of the 9th. But the Lord of the 9th is also the
Lord of the 12th, and Buda therefore cannot do so much good as Sani
can do. Sukra is the Lord of the Lagna and nothing is said of him.
The author simply says Guru and other evil planets, kill the person
when they possess death powers. Guru is evil, for he owns 3rd and
6th houses. Kuja is bad, for he owns 2nd and 7th houses but he
himself does not kill. Ravi is the Lord of the 11th and he is bad.
Sukra is the Lord of the Ist and 8th houses and therefore he becomes
bad as both of those houses are bad. The author of the Jataka
Chandrika does not mention clearly that the Lord of the birth is un-
favourable. But we have it on good authority that the period of the
Lord of birth is always productive of evil to the concerns of life,
specially to its extent. hula is owned by an auspicious planet
Sukra and generally those who are born in this sign lead a fortunate
life. We simply mean that as a sign of the Zodiac, it is one of the
most powerful in the production of its own good results.

बुधशुकरा्कतनयाः पापास्सुरगुरुष्भः ।
सूयोचन्दरमसावेव भवेतां योगकारकौ ॥ ६१ ॥
जीवोनहन्तासोम्याययाहन्तारो मारकाइयाः । .
तत्त्फलानिविद्ेयान्येवं हश्िकजन्मनः ॥ ६२ ॥
Stanzas 61—62. Vrishchika Lagna. (Scorpio).

To the person born in Vrischika Lagna, Buda, Sukra
and Sani are evil. Guru is favourable.’ Ravi and ~
become the real producers of Rajayogam (61).

Guru himself does not kill even when possessed of

death-inflicting powers. Buda and other evil planets cause
death to the person when they have power to do so. These

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 71] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 63

are the results which must be carefully borne in mind in
predicting about Vrischika Lagna. (61).
NOTES.

Sani is bad, because he owns 3rd and 4th houses and is not
friend of Kuja, Lord of Vrischika. The ownership of the 3rd house
is evil, while the ownership of the 4th by an evil planet is good
Sukra is the Lord of the 7th and 12th houses, heis not a friend of
Kuja and therefore produces bad. Buda is the Lord of the 8th and
11th houses and both these houses are very bad to own for any planet.
Guru is good because he owns the 2nd and 5th houses. 5th house is no
doubt a very auspicious one to own; but the lord of the second need not
always be good natured. The author does not say: anything about
the combination of the Sun and Moon (Ravi and Chundra). But we
know as a matter of fact that Raviand Chundra are owners of each
one house only. Chundra is the lord of the 9th a good house. Ravi
is the lord of the 10th. Ravi is an evil planet and owns the 4th qua-
drant or 10th house and therefore produces good. The combination
of the Lords of 9th and 10th houses must be productive of Rajayoga

In many places the author of the Jataka Chandrika seems to
hint that the Lords of the death houses 2nd and 7th are not geod and
that when they have the power they are likely to kill the person un-
less they are relieved from this responsibility by owning some good
house, by associations with good planets, and by favourable positions
and aspects. Here we have an illustration of that principle. Guru
is the lord of the 2nd house’and he must produce death. But Guru
also owns the 5th house and therefore becomes a good planet. All
planets who own the 5th and 9th houses, whatever may be their
nature become good and this goodness perhaps is the real cause of
Guru saving the life of the person born in Vrischika. Buda and other
evil planets cause the death of the party. Buda owns 8th and 11th
houses and these are very unfavourable indeed for any planet to own.
Sani is the Lord of the 3rd house and he may kill. .

Sukra is the Lord of the 7th and 12th and both of them are bad.
Kuja himself is also bad and I don’t see why he would not kill a per-
son when he is ill-disposed. In all these cases we must patiently exa-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 72] =====
64 JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

mine the details composing the combination of planets,-see how much
each planet is capable of giving good or bad, and eummarise the re-
sults of the planetary combinations by reference to astrological prin-
ciples. The apparent contradictions and inconsistencies must be re-
conciled as far as possible and to do this the reader must have acquired
some mastery in the subject. Technical. sciences are always diffi-
cult and when the student has no patience the difficulties multiply
themselves and thousand fold and confound their humble efforts.
But time and perseverence must win the day in the long run and we
recommend the students to ge carefully over the principles of astro-
logical sciences enunciated here for their benefit.

एक एव काविः पापः Fanta ara |
योगोभास्करसौम्याभ्यां स्याभहन्तांश्मत्सुतः ॥६३॥
घ्रन्ति ्ुक्रादयः पाणः हन्देरक्षण रक्षिताः
ज्ञातव्यानि फरान्येवं चापजस्य मनीषिभिः ॥ ६४ ॥

81५४248. 63 and 64. Danur Lagna. Sagittarins.

To the person born in. Dhanas, Sukra is alone. evil.
Ravi and Kuja are productive of good. The combination of
Ravi and Buda produces Rajeyogam. Sani himself does not
kill even when possesged of death-inflicting powers, (63)
. Sukra and other evil planets when invested with death
infligting powers, kill the person born in- Dhanas and these,
results must be carefully predicted- by the learned (in ax
trology), (64)

NOTES.

Sanskrit seems to be a very flexible language and one whick
can be suited to any interpretation. The first portion of Stanza-63
is the same in the different book we have but the latter’ portiod
differs considerably. Yoga Bhaskara Sowmyubyam is one réeadiag
while-the other is Yukto Bhaskara Bhowmabhyam Nahanti Ravi
Nandana. The first reading may be interpreted thus—the Yoga or
combination of Bhaskara (Ravi) and. Soumya (Buds) produces Raja-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 73] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 65

yogam while the other reading means that when Sani is in combina-
tion with Bhaskara and Bhouma, he will not killthe person though
possessed of death-inflicting powers. This point requires a thorough
explanation. Sukra is bad because he owns the 6th and 11th houses
both of which are evil and we can at once see that Sukra is bad.
Kuja and Ravi are declared to be good.

Kuja owns the 5th and 12th houses of which 5th is good and
12th bad, while personally Kuja isa friend of Guru who is the lord’
of Dhanas. Ravi is both a friend of Guru and also owns the 9th
house and thus he becomes a perfectly good planet. About the
combination of Buda and Ravi one version is perfectly silent and I
believe it is wrong or has apparently misunderstood the spirit of the
author's explanation of the astrological principles. We have it
clearly stated by the author in thé earlier portions of his work that
the combinations of the Lords of the quadrants and trines are always
productive of good results and they give rise to Rajayogam or suc-
cess in political life. Ravi is the Lord of the 9th while Buda is the
Lord of the 7th and 10th houses both of which are quadrants. There-
fore the combination of the Lords of the 9th and 10th houses must
produce Rajayogam. This has been omitted in the ‘second reading
and I believe it is an important omission considering the particular
care the author has taken all along to show the existence of Raja-
yogam whenever and wherever the Lords of the quadrants and_trines
unite together. The second reading, not only makes an important
omission but also adds a misinterpretation. It says that Ravinandana
(Sani) does not kill when he joins Bhowma or Bhaskara, Bhouma
means Kuja. It is opposed to the spirit of the author's explanation.
In none of the previous stanzas does the author say that a combina-
nation with another planet, exempts a planet from exercising such
death-inflicting powers. Sani, jt must be remembered, owns the
2nd and 8rd houses of which the last is an unfavourable house. The
owning of the 2nd has not been distinctly declared to be an inauspi-
Gious one. The author says here and there that its lord becomes power-
ful in inflicting death. : Therefore we may safely stick up to the first
reading which is more sensible and consistent with the author's ways
of explaining astrological principles. Who are other evil planets?
Has not béen clearly mentioned by ‘him but those who are not men-

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 74] =====
66 JATAKACHUNDRIEA.

tioned in the list of good planets must be presumed to be evil as 8 mat-
ter of fact. Sani is evil, Buda owns 7th and 10th houses and becomes
evil if he owns quadrants as'an auspicious and good when owning
quadrants as an evil planet. This therefore depends upon his associa-
tions and aspects. Chandra owns the 8th house but the evil which re-
sults from owning the 8th house doesnot existin the case of Ravi and
Chandra, and therefore Chandra ought to have been classed as a good
planet because he also chances to be a friend of the lord of Dhanas
viz., Guru. These evil planets when possessed of death-inflicting powers
kill the person born in Dhanas. All the above results, the author says,
must be carefully predicted by the well-versed in the science of astro-
logy. In stanza 64, there is another reading which also has to be care-
fully considered. The first reading which is the most correct I believe,
says Gnathavyani Phalanyavan, whilethe second reading says Budah-
papayuthonatht. The first means that we have to understand the re-
sults above named in the manner described, while the second reading
means that Buda when combined with evil planets, does not kill the
person himself. I do not understand why Buda should not kill when
he is evil and when he possesses death-inflicting powers. The combi-
nation of an evil planet with other evil planets, has never been stated
to produce good and death has been considered by mankind as the

i

worst of evils though this question as a matter of fact, is open to |

serious objections into which it is not our present purpose to enter.
These ill considered alterations and erasures in the original books
and manuskripts have been producing much injurious results
in as much as, we have to deal with the correct spirit of the
technical sciences and not with their philological or word-quibbling
niceties. In the interpretation of a stanza one has to be very carefu
about the explanation one offers. The spirit of the author must be
preserved at any cost. His general principles of explanation must not
be sacrificed for any vanity which might give the commentator some
airs of originality, which he wishes to assume and the explanations
offered to the public, must be consistent and sensible, so that they
may, in no way, contradict the earlier portions of the work under
reference and translation.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 75] =====
2 .
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 67

कुजजीवेन्दवः पापाः श्वुभौभागेवचन्द्रनौ ।
राजयोगकरस्साक्षादेक एव श्रगोस्सुतः ॥ ६५ ॥
चनद्रात्मजेनसंयुको विशेषफल्दायकः ।
स्वयश्चैवनहन्तास्यान्मन्दो भोमादयः. परे ॥ ६६ ॥
निहन्तारः पापिनस्ते मारकत्वेन रक्षिताः ।
ज्ञातव्यानि बुधेरेवं फलानिर्गजन्मनः ॥ ६७ ॥

Sranzas 65, 66 and 67, Makara Lagna—Capricornus.
To the person born in Makara, Kuja, Guru, and
Chundra are evil, Sukra and Buda are good. Sukra alone is
productive of Rajayogam. (65).

In conjunction with Chundratmaja (Buda) there will
result much happiness. Sani will not kill the person though
possessed of death-inflicting powers. But Kujaand other
evil planets, when they are invested with death-inflicting
powers, kill the native. These arethe results which are
generally predicted by the learned about the persons born
in Makara Lagna. (66 & 67).

NOTES.

Kuja, Guru and Chundra are declared to be evil to persons born
under the influence of Makara. Kuja is evil, because he owns the 4th
and eleventh houses of which the 11 is bad while the 4th is good,
because a quandrant owned by an evil planet produces good. Guru
is evil because he owns the 8rd and 12th houses both of which are
bad, for any planets to own. Chundra is the Lord ofthe 7th house
and he is declared to be bad by the author. Here there ought to
have been some exception putin. The author stated in stanza 6
that when planets are evil and own quadrants, they produce good,
while good planets owning quadrants produce evil. If Chundra is
weak, debilitated or badly associated and aspected he becomes or is to
be considered as an evil planet and therefore when he owns quadrants
‘he must produce good. But when he is full, well associated and

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 76] =====
68 JaTAKACHUNDRIKA.

aspected he becomes auspicious and must produce evil:hen. he owns
quadrants. Sukra is good because he owns 5th and 10th houses. In
cases where a good planet owns trines and quadrants together he
seems to lose the evil that he would otherwise produce as lord of

guadrant.

In conjunction with Chundratmaja (Buda) there will result much
happiness ? This para of the author is singularly vague. “Who should
be in conjunction with Buda, is not clearly stated by the author ;
perhaps he means that the combination of Sukra and Buda produces
Rajayogam. Buda is the lord of the 6th and 9th houses of which
the 1st is bad while the second is productive of good results. Sukra
in this case does not want the help of any body to produce Rajayo-
gam. He is the lord of 5thand 10th houses and he combines in
himself the ownership of quadrants and trines. He has independent
powers to confer good. No other combination could do Buda any
good. Chundra is the lord of 7th, a quadrant and as such may pro-
duce good when he is weak or debilitated. But the combination of
the lords of the quadrants 1st, 4th and 7th with lords of trines, is not
so highly valued for Rajayogam, by the author. Sani will not kill the
person though possessed of death-inflicting powers. This requires
an explanation. Sani owns two houses Ist and 2nd. 1stis good becaus
it isa quadrant and owned by an evil planet. The owning of the 2nd
has been declared though indirectly to be bad. Sani has a natural
tendency to kill natives because he likes to kill. To thisthere are
powers added which ought to have made him a death-inflicting planet,
‘but I suppose the owning of a quadrant coupled with the love he has
for a person born under his own direct influence made him good .to
‘the person born in Makara. Kuja and otherevil planets kill him.
Gurn is evil, Ravi is evil as also Chundra. So that practically we have
Guru, Ravi, Kuja and Chundrafor inflicting death while Sani, Buds
and Sukra are for doing good especially the last two planets. The
author says that these results must be carefully analysed and under-
stood by the students of astrology.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 77] =====
#ATAKACHUNDRIKA. 69

 शेजीवन्दवः षापाः एकोदैत्युरुषभः ।
राजयोगकरौभौम कविद्धेको बृहस्पतिः ॥ ६८ ॥
नहन्ताघ्न्ति भौमाय्याः मारकत्वेन निरिचतः ।

हात्यानि इुधैरेवं फलानि घटजन्मनः ॥ ६९
Sranzas, 68, anp 69. Kumbhalagna—(Aquarius.)

To the person born in Kumbhalagna, Kuja, Guru and
Chundra are evil, Sukra alone is auspicious; the combination
of Sukra and Kuja produces Rajayogam. (68).

Guru will not kill the person born in Kumbha by him-
self though possessed of death-inflicting powers, Kuja and
other evil planets when invested with death powers kill the
native ; the results of planetary combizations must thus be
known by learned pandits (in astrology). (69).

NOTES

Kuja, Chundra, and Guru are evil. Kuja is the lord of 8rd and
10th houses of which the 3rd house is evil while the owning of the
10th by anevil planet like Kujais productive .of good. Guru is the
lord of the 2nd and 11th houses and both of them are bad houses.
Chandra is the lord of the 6th house and is therefore evil. The com~
bination of quadrants and trinesin one and the same planet pro-
duce good. Sukra owns 4thand 9th houses and thus he is good.
But for Rajayogama, the combination of the lords of the 9th and 10th
houses is necessary and therefore the author says Kuja and Sukra
lords of the 10th and 9th respectively must join together to produce

- political suecess. 10th house is the house of employment, political work,
reputation, command and so on, and therefore its lord must combine
wth the lord of the 9th for producing Rajayogam. Guru is the lord
ofthe 2nd house and as such possesses the power of killing thé person.
He is, besides, also the lord of the 11th house. But the author says,
he will not himself kill the native when possessed of death-inflicting
powers. Kuja and other evil planets kill the person when they
possesi. death powers, Kuja owns 8rd and 10th houses of which Ord

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 78] =====
70 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

is bad while the 10th is good. When good and evil balance each
other, by a rule of astrology, evil prevails. Chundra isbad and he
may kill the party. Nothing is said of Raviand Sani. Ravi is the
lord of the 7th house and as an evil planet he must produce, good by
owning a quadrant. But he ownsthe 7th house which relates to
death. He is not mentioned by the author in the list of the
good or in that of the bad. Why ? I suppose he is neutral. What about
Sani? He is the lord of the 1st and 12th houses and as such owns
one good and one bad house. But there is a special evil attached to
Sani in this Lagna. The owner of the birth is also the lord of the
12th and this keeps him from doing any good to the native. The
author is compelled to be very brief and he could not help it. Within
the narrow limits of less than 80 Stanzas, he has to explain the whole
spirit of astrology and threfore, he is very brief and his Stanzas are very
comprehensive. The careful students to whom he invariably appeals
for a careful prediction of the events in a man’s life have to go to other
books of astrology which give greater details and whichare omitted by
the writer and explain his slokas in the light of the general principles
of the astrological sciences.

AYRE: THAT fA gat |
महीसुत गुरौयोग कारिणा नेवभूसुतः | ७० ॥
मारकामारकाभिक्या मन्दादयघ्नन्ति पापिनः ।
इत्यह्यानि इुधैस्सम्यक्फलानि षजंन्मनः ॥ ७१ ॥
Sranzas 70 anp 71. Meenalagnam.—( Pisces).

To the person born in Meena Lagna, Sani, Sukra, Ravi.
and Buda are evil, Kuja and Chundra are auspicious.
Guru and Kuja in combination’ produce Rajayogam
Kuja himself does not kill the native even when possessed
of death powers. (70).

Sani and other evil planets kill the person born in Meena
when they posses death-inflicting powers. The learned in

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 79] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 71

astrology must try to understand the results of the. planetary
influences in this way for’ persons born in Meena
Lagna. (71).-

NOTES.

Sani, Sukra, Ravi and Buda are declared to be evil. Excepting
Ravi the othor 3 planets are well known to be the foes of Guru, the
Lord of Meena. Ravi‘is his friend. But Ravi owns only one house
and that is the 6th.. Therefore the Lord of the 6th house cannot be
good. Sani owns 11th and 12th houses and as such becomes perfectly
evil, both houses being bad for any planet toown. Sukra owns 8rd
and 8th houses both are bad and Sukra therefore produces evil. Buda
owns 4th & 7th houses. If he is weak, badly associated or aspected,
he becomes a bad planet and when an evil planet owns two quadrants
he ought to produce good instead of evil. But when Buda is well-
aspected and is in conjunction with auspicious planets, he is said to
become an auspicious planet himself and when he is considered a
benefic owning two quadrants he is bad and he must be considered in
a similar manner. But no such explanations are offered by the author
in the work under notice. Chandra is the lord of the 5th house
and Kuja is the lord of the 2nd and 9th houses and these are con-
sidered by him as productive of good results. Kuja is not
said to kill the person ‘though possessed of death-inflicting
powers because, although he owns the 2nd house, he is also the lord
of the 9th which isa very good sign for any planettoown. The
combination of Guru and Kuja is needed for Rajayogam. Guru, it
will be seen, is the lord of the 1st and 10th houses both being bad to
own. But the author has explained inthe earlier portions of his
work that for the production of Rajayogam the combination or junc-
tion of the lords of the 9th and 10th are needed, Sani and other evil
planets kill the person born in Meena when they are possessed of death-
inflicting powers. Sani, Sukra, Buda, Ravi, and even Guru own evil
houses and they may kill the person when they are invested
with suitable powers for causing death to the native.

एवं द्ादश्चभावानां श्चभाञ्चभ फलं विदुः ।
तन्वादि द्रादश्चानाश्च भावानां योजयेत्फलं ॥ ७२ ॥

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 80] =====
72 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

Stanza 72.

In this way the results of the planetary combinations
for the 12 Zodiacal signs must be understood by the learned
in astrology. In asimilar way also should be explained
the results of combinations for the signification of the 12
houses commencing fromthe Lagna whichever it might be
and wherever we might commence it.

NOTES.

The author first explained the general principles of astrology and
then Ied us to the different results which we have to predict for each
of the 12 Zodiacal signs conimencing from the Aries or Mesha. The
signification of the 12 houses have not been explained by him. They
must be learnt from other works on astrology. He further
says that having known the results of the planetary combinations
and lordships for the 12 houses, we must now proceed to consult in
similar way to the elucidation of the good and bad which the native
will have from the 12 significations commencing from the birth time
or Lagna. The birth time indicates body, natural disposition, com-
plexion etc. Second indicates eyes, wealth, family, speech ete. Third
indicates brothers and sisters, courage, maidservants etc. Fourth
denotes mother, education, happiness, conveyances, lands etc. Fifth
shows children, intelligence, councils etc. Sixth.declares debt, disease,
misery, foes etc. Seventh signifies wife, cupidity, potency, marital
relations etc. Eighth indicates death, longevity &c. Ninth indicates
father, religiousness, wealth, piety etc. Tenth indicates reputation,
success in political life, influence etc. Eleventh denotes friends, elder
brothers and sisters, influence, general successetc. And the twelfth
sign indicates sin, destruction, hell, expenditure. Thusit will be seen
that each of the significations must be adjudged as if they were so many
Lagnas, and the planetary combinations for them will havea special
reference to their prosperity ordestruction, On judging, for instance,
of the second house, we have to see who are its lords, who are his
friends, who are his enemies, what is the general attitude of the other
planets towards this lagnam, their strength and weakness, exaltations
and debilitations and various other sources of power which the signé
as well as their lords are supposed to produce.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 81] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA. 78

पापा मीचग्रहास्तेषागुचस्ते सति िःफलं ।
| तयोगाः किं करिष्यान्ते खदश्ञानामनागमे ॥ ७३ ॥

Stanza, 73.

Planets which are debilitated, or evil cannot do any-
thing to the person when their own periods (Dasas) do not
happen or come. The same planets may be exalted, but

what could they give P = (3 ~
NOTES.

This is also singularly vague. The different copies I have, do
not agree in the readings and each may be separately interpreted.
I shall however confine myself to the explanation of the stanza instead
of quoting the different readings which will not much help the be-
ginner in knowing the subject of Astrology. The planets may be good
or bad, they may be exalted or debilitated, they may have good sour-
ces of drawing power or fruitful sources of commanding evil, but what
will it avail if the periods of the planets do not happen to the person
who is born under their influence. Take, for instance, an example.
The total length of the periods of all the planets put together will
give us a period of 120 years. They are distributed according to one
system (oodudasa) as follows among the 9 planets. Ravi—6 years,
Chandra—10, Kuja—7, Rahu—18, Guru—i6, Sani—19,
Buda—17, Kethu—7, and Sukra—20. All these give a total of 120
years. A person is born in Mesha and commences with the period or
Dasa of “Chandra. The period of Ravi is very good forthe native
and let me grant for argument’s sake that the position of Ravi is also
good and he is in every way powerful to do good to the native. But
he is practically useless in as much as his period comes to the native
after he has managed to live more than 114 years orso. Andif
his term of life extends to only 50 or 60 years, the period of Ravi
never could do him any good at all because it never comes. It is
something like this. Say I have an excellent friend who makes’a
promise to me that he would give me much wealth when he comes
tome or whenIgo to him. If henever comes to me orl
never reach him the promise remains practically a dead letter and I.

f

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 82] =====
74 JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

will remain a poor man. Some other manuscripts say that when
a planet is debilitated or evil what could it do even when it is exalted
or good? This explanation does not seemto me satisfactory. The
two conditions are absurd. In the lst place a good planet cannot
become evil and in the second place an exalted planet cannot become
debilitated, under these circumstances how could they become good
when they are quite the reverse. If the planets are bad or debilitated,
the person need not fear anything when their periods do not happen
tohim. This sounds more sensible. I cannot entirely agree with
the author in the above explanations. Ifa planet is exalted or debi-
litated, it is true he will not produce the best good or the worst evil
until we get his period and if that period never comes then his ex-
altation or debilitation practically has no result for the person. But
his sub-periods and other minor divisions must be occurring in the
periods of other planets and then it cannot be said that they will keep
quite. They may not give the person as much good as they could
have given, when they possessed the highest power for good or evil
but still as lords of the sub-periods &c., they will not remain inactive.
They exercise their own influences and do so_with some modifica-
tions. But of course the author does not preclude us from attaching
so much meaning. In a short Stanza he simply says that the periods
of exalted or debilitated planets cannot do us good or evil when they
do not happen to the native and thereby hints that much attention
need not be paid to those periods in the writing of a horoscope as they
do not come in time for enjoyment.

Influenes of planets, it must be remembered, has been treated by
the astrological writers under various heads.

(1) At the time of birth in the planetary combinations, each
planet has got a general influence extending throughout life and
subjected to certain local or tempatary causes.

(2) The influences of Dasas or Bhukties exercised only during
_ definite times and superseding as it were and considerably modifying
the general influences.
(3) The influences of planets by their contact with or aspect.by
good or evil planets.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 83] =====
JAPAKACHUNDRIKA, 75

Now the author seems to have completely ignored the first kind
of influence I have hinted. In the illustration given above. Ravi in
an exalted position at the time of birth must raise the position of the
person far above the ordinary throughout the period of man’s existence.
Suppose his Dasa never comes. Does not the native derive subs-
tantial benefit from the fact of Ravis’ elevation ?

 

मित्रदश्चसमायोगे फलं मिश्रं समं विदुः । |
केनद्रभिकोणेष्युखेवमित्रग्रहसमन्विते ॥ ७४ ॥

Stanza—74,

When friendly and unfriendly planets combine together
they produce mixed and ordinary results. If the planets
occupy quadrants, trines or places of exaltations in con-
junction with friendly planets they produce better results.

NOTES.

In the Astrological Self Instructor published by me (third
Edition and also in my notes to the English translation of Sarvartha
Chinthamani). I have clearly stated what is meant by friendship,
enemity etc., among the planets. It is certainly not to be presumed
that they will be constantly warring with each other as do the un-
principled and unbridled potentates of the earth, but the influences of
the planets are to be calculatedwith reference to their rays which are
constantly flowing from their different globes, crossing each other,
counteracting against one another, augmenting or nullifying each
others power. This is very important for the students to note.
Enemity among planets means that when two rays shed by planets
nullify each others influence they produce no perceptible results
because each tties to counteract against the others influence. The
combination of friendly and unfriendly planets produces very
ordinary and mixed results. Unfriendly planets always try to
influence the prospects of the native for bad while friendly
planets try to produce good results, The person therefore

gets good and evil results or what the world calls mixed re-
sults. The intensity is lost by the opposition and the extent of the

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 84] =====
76 JATAKACHUNDRIKA,

production depends upon the strength of the planets who produce
them. Planets are classed into good and evil and a distinction is
made between them when they own quadrants. Owning it must be
remembered is different from occupying a house.

The author says planets which occupy quadrants produce better
results and this general statement is corroborated by other authors
in astrology. Planets occupying trines are productive of
good results, and those which are exalted are of course, the best we
can have. Exaltation implies the possession of the highest power to
do good. Such planets when they are in conjunction with friendly
planets, produce better results. He does not distinctly enumerate
the cases where they produce better results. He simply says bette”
results. Better than what? must be explained by the student as he
progresses in his knowledge of astrology. Planets in kandras are
said to produce better results. This is supported by Badarayana
(Vyasa). But it isto be accepted ‘in my humble opinion with
great deference to the learned writers with certain modifications:
Sani occupying the tenth, Kuja occupying the 7th, Ravi occupying
the 4th, and Khsinachundra (new moon) occupying the first are no
donbt planets who occupy Kendras. I humbly submit that the
combination above given certainly produces ill-health and difficulties.
Perhaps Badarayanameans by the expressisn Kandhra 8thathi
Balasyuah that good planets occupying Kandras produce prosperity
making exception in the case of Sani in the 7th, Kuja and Ravi in
the 10th.

पित्रराशचि गतेवापि मन्रिणा यदिवीक्षिते ।
मित्रयुक्ते बरुवति राजतुस्यो भवेन्नरः ॥ ७५ ॥

Sranza—75.

Planets which occupy friendly houses, which are in
conjunction with friendly planets and which are powerful,
when aspected by Guru, mako a man attain to a position
which may be equal to that of a king.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 85] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA: 77
NOTES.

Manuscripts are’at considerable variance with each other in the
few stanzas which complete the work, and I shall not give the readers
the trouble of different readings pointing out the probable stanza which
might have been written by the author. The occupation of planets in
friendly houses is good as alsotheir conjunction with them. Itis pointed
out elsewhere that the planets must otherwise be powerful. They have
several sources of strength and these sources must also be good. When
to these items of power to produce good, the aspect of the best planet
Guru is added, there is not the slightest doubt but that their influences
will make a man equal to a king himself. Thisrefers to only power
and position. Happiness may not depend upon the possession of these
two. In one work, the author is made to give only 79 stanzas, while
the other makes the number go up to 81. This surely must bave
been due to some omissions or frauds purposly practised by the vain
men, into whose hands the early manuscripts must have fallen. I will
only give the purport of the 79 stanzas and complete the work,

 

`. छ्भपापात्मकतया निदिष्टभ्य फलं हाः ।
दिशन्ति श्भा एव खदशषासु स्वभुक्तिषु ll 9% ॥

Sranza. 76.

Planets, by their becoming good and evil and being bound
by well-defined principles, produce good or evil in their own
Dasas (periods) and Bhukties (sub-periods).

NOTES.

This is again vaguely expressed. The commentaries are confli-
cting and the meaning will have to be carefully found out. The
main idea seems to be that planets, good are evil, produce favourable
results or the reverse in their own periods and sub-periods. Planets are
further subjected to definite principles or procedure and they cannot
deviate from their declared policy whatever it may be. It is doubt~
ful whether a good planet produces good in its own sub-period when

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 86] =====
78 JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

its Dasa begins, and the same doubt may be expressed of evil planets.
The author has not told us anywhere that the sub-period of the planet
* in its own Dasa whether it is good or bad produces favourable results.
But here he makes a general statement which may be explained more
satisfactorily by the light of other principles found in the astrological
sciences.

फलानिग्रहचारेण सूचयन्ति मनीषिणः ।
कोवक्तातारतम्यस्य तमेकं बेधसंविना ॥ ७७ ॥

Sranza. 77.
The learned pundits in astrology suggest the results of
planetary infleunces by the movements of the planets; but
ezcepting the great Brahma himself no body can definitely
speak to the minute details which can be predicted from the
astrological sciences.

 

NOTES.

The learned have found, either by inspiration or by careful and
close study, that the influences of the planets are calculable and so
can be predicted. The author then, I believe, simply points out the
difficulties which lie inthe mastery of a science like the one under
notice. By its very nature it is a very difficult science. The influences
of only nine planets are taken into consideration, and from these nine
planets and the 12 zodical signs the whole phenomena of mineral,
vegetable and animal species have to be carefully analysed. The
त» 68 therefore which lie in the way of predicting results, are too
many to be easily overcome by the ordinary minds and the author
says that though the learned Pundits in astrology can suggest the
good and evil results by watching the planetary revolutions and
counter-revolutions, they will not be able to know the whole details.
This is a sort of apology among the sanskritists which is ge
nerally offered on behalf of the learned to show their humiliation and
the extent of the sea of knowledge which lies before them still
unexplored. The great Brahma has knowledge. of the whole world
and He alone knows the details of the astrological and other sciences
perfectly. He is called The Sarvagana or Allknowing.

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 87] =====
JAPAKACHUNDRIKA. 79

थङ्गनारायणाभिरूया यायजूक तनूभव ।
शरीव्टेश्वरार्येन कृता जातकचन्दिका ॥ ७८ ॥

Sranza-78.

This work Jataka Chundrika has been written by the
learned Pundit Venkatasa Sastrulu, Son of the Dikshit
Yagnanarayana.

न ¶ NOTES.

The father of the auther seems to have been a Dikshit or one
who had performed various Yagnams or sacrifices, she nobility of the
author’s birth is therefore placed beyond any doubt. The author calls
himself a learned pundit and he could not have been otherwise. In
the course of 75 stanzas he has tried to lead the astrological stu-
dent to the doors of future predictions and he tells him there that by
diligence he would find admission{into the sacred precincts of the
unquestionable truths contained in Astrology.

The age of the work cannot be so easily marked. The free use
of the names of the planets Rahu and Ketu show clearly that the work
must have been more recent than that of the Brihat Jatakaof Vara-
hamihiracharye, who flourished during the time of Vikramaditya and
who was one of the nine gems which graced that illustrious monarchs
reign. The age of Vikramaditya is roughly stated to be about 2000
years back. I do not even think that the Jataka Chundrika is even so
old as that. It must have been written pretty recently, perhaps in
the 12thor 13th centuries A.D. when Astrology was prevalent all over
India. The name sounds like a eouth Indian name and it is di-
ficult to identify his birth place and that of his education. I shall
hereafter commence to collect information regarding the history of
the various astrological writers whose works have prominently appeared
before the public and about whom little information has reached them.
Tt may not be an easy task, but any correct details which may come

===== [jatakachundrika-1900 | PDF page 88] =====
JATAKACHUNDRIKA.

 

80

to my knowledge in the course of my ‘travels: or.my investigations ;
will be published for the benefit of the public, so that these details
may well be criticised by the learned before they are accepted as so

many truths

॥ इति जातकचन्दिका संपूण ॥

The End,

 

“Printed at the Royal Victoria Press i=-Madras.

