Sarvartha Chintamani (Part 2) (1899) - Venkatesha
Translator: B. Suryanarain Row | Coverage: PARTIAL: second half of the partial 1899 scan; combined coverage still ends around chapter 1 stanza 146 (2nd house)
Cite as (slug, PDF page). Verify against the page image before trusting a rule.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 1] =====
AvrTHom MAKES A COMPILATION. 13k

TATATATA TATA: a1
त्सारंतुध्वासर्वं सेवेव: ।
यद्यत्सर्वं ्वकटेडोनबुध्वा
तत्तत्पाकेयोजयेत्तत्फलानि ॥ १४६॥
इतिश्री सवर्धचितामणौ
होरादाखे संज्ञाध्यायःप्रथमः,

Sranza 146.

L have made this compilation after reading the whole of the astro-
logical sciences and I have composed this for the benefit of the wortd.
The details thus given by me—the learned Venkatasa—ought to be
carefully remembered ant applied to the planets tu their respective
Dasas ant Bhukites.

NOTES.

he author does not pretend to be an original writer. He says.
plainly that he consulted, before the preparation of his great wark,.
Sarwasastrasaram-or essence of the whole astrological science and.
picked up the most important to give a sound knowledge of the
joitisshastra to the student. He does the work from no mercenary:
motive.as he clearly says that he writes his book for Locopakara or
for the benefit of the world. His Language is happy and ha is con-
scious of his abilities. as a great. astrologer, and makes no conceal-
ment of his honest pride. He calls himself the Learned Venkatas-
wara in almost. every concluding stanza of each chapter of his:
beautiful work, and from the style, the manner of arrangement,
the: brevity of expression, the gradations he introduces in order to:
the perfect understanding of his excellent work, he cannot be any
other than:a_profound sanskrit scholar, an extensive reader, a, learn-
ed mathematician and one who was thoroughly acquainted with the
vast aatrological literature of his time—mathematical, horescopic
and. horary. During the course of 146 stanzas he has condensed a.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 2] =====
132 SARWARTUAUHINTAMANI.

world of information which is very necessary in the field of astro-
logical studies and predictions in this work. Without a mastery
in this first chapter no satisfactory progress can ever be attained
by the readers in the series of planetary combinations which he
introduces to explain the 12 Zodiacal signs and their significations.
The best way I would recommend this study would be, that
the readers ought to read this chapter as often as they can. Con-
stant reading makes them familiar with the essentials explained in
the Ist chapter. There details are useful in predicting the phalam
(results) of the planets all through the future of the man. When
Guru Dasa comes, what are we to expect? Guru governs various
articles of necessity and luxury. When Jupiter is good he gives
them well. When evil he breaks them or causes loss to them, or
through them. The results of a good planet will be satisfactory
and agreeable and the results of a bad planet may be, not only
losses through articles which he would have given as a good one,
but also misery which may arise through various other sources
The sources of happiness and misery are carefully delineated
and these—the author insists—must be well read,carefully digested,
and clearly remembered by his students. Art helps nature to avery
large extent but there must be satuie to be helped by art. Man’s-
psychology is a puzzling stbject- Hardly two branches of know-
ledge develope equally well ina person. The constitution of the
nervous matter in man is very peculiar and admits of only one sided
development. Good astronomers are bad astrologers and good astro-
logers are bad astronomers. Mind cannot be measured by mathe-
matics and itis Mind that produced mathematics and measures them,
Although therefore mathematics are generally needed to give a fair
knowledge in predictions, they are not indispensible for real great-
negs as a successful predictor. Each man should specially cultivate
that which is most suited to his capacity and taste. I have seen
& few astrologers who are most successful predictors of future
events—national and individual. As soon a8 a question is.
broached before them, they find out the planeatry combinations by
ordinary methods ina few minutes, and then make: predictions
which are verified by the happening of subsequent events ina

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 3] =====
Minn Works Meviion. 183

most remarkable manner. In the commencement of their studies’
they do not deduce results from calculations, but begin to predict
by simple. inductive methods |

___ Those possessed of this extraordinary power begin to argue
the points in quite a different way. They say that the horoscope
of. any person presents a certain combination of planets This
combination producesa certain result. ‘The result therefore must
have had a particular combination. When the results are known
can we not guess the combinations? A question is put to them

They say that the putting of the question by a person is the result
of certain combination. of planets in that man’s horoscope, and
when those combinations are known it is easy for them to know
their subsequent movements by the results they produce. When
planets stand in a particular position at the time of birth or at the
time of query, they must necessarily go on combining in definite
conjunctions. These combinations at the different epochs of a
man’s life readily suggest themselves to the inductive mind and it
simply gives out the results as if it had them all in its mental
grasp. Ordinary minds cannot understand the logic of this kind
of reasoning. A man comes and asks an astrologer to tell him the
phalam of his horoscope. At once the comprehensive mind of the
astrologer grasps the exact combinations of planets which produ-
ced such personage. Having taken in this situation of the planets
at the time of birth, the mind at once guesses tie various phases
of these planetary movements, and their periods, and sub-periods
and begins to make predictions past, present and future with the
same definiteness and ease. Mind’s work is curious and the minds
of these wonderful men take in these various combinations of planets
and their results almost in the course of an incredibly short time.
This really puzzles the ordinary systematic working man, because,
he has measured the extent of work that he has to do, to produce.
a certain result and finds it difficult to follow the rapid workings
of .an intellect possessed with sparks of real originality. The
reasoning of the two are radically different. It is a remarkable
fagt in the history of the astrological literature that all the authors

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 4] =====
334 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

who hail since the beginning of Kaliyuga (5000 years) are simply
compilers and not original; authors. They may be original—so
far as the arrangement and treatment of the subject goes, but they
never even pretended to introduce one fact in astronomy or astro-
logy which was not touched by the earlier Rishis. Varahami-
hira, Bhattotphala, Bhaskaracharya, Aryabhatta, Vararuchi, Yava-
nacharya, Yavanaswara, Chanikya and other eminent mathemati-
cians and astrologers, have paid the greatest honors in their works
to the older Maharishis and followed them completely.

Siddhantha means Truth and 18 susiddhanthas have been
named in the earlier works. Of the whole lot of these Siddhanthas,
Surya Siddhantha stands most prominently and as a great autho-
ratative work. Vysa flourished in the end of Dwapara and beginn-
ing of Kaliyuga, the era when the war of Mahabharata seems to
have been waged. Among the Siddbantees or original writers he
seems to have been the last and those who followed him were
Tantraics or writers of inferior works which did not come up to
the standard of the Siddhanta stamp.

Therefore all these second rate writers, whom we are admir-
ing as men of great intellectual reach, have paid the highest
réspect to the original Rishis, and they did nothing more than
simply collect such information as would suit the times they lived
in and the tastes of the people to whom they had to address their
works. Venkatasa is certairily one of this class, and falls even a
little lower than those second rate men whom Ihave named above,
He boldly says that he is a learned man, that he had read all the
works’ on astrolegy available in his time, and that he composed
the work with a view to benefit the world. ‘He has unmistakably.
referred to the great Rishis and Munis from whom he gathers his
information and he says that those Munis wrote the astrological
works for the edification of mankind. A recapitulation of the
subjects he has treated in the first chapter willrefresh the memory
of the redders. Venkatasa began with a prayer to Gods, his Guru,
and other benefactors of the world. Then he explained : how
Planets, Constellations, Signs and’ the Bhootas’ exercised their
mutual influences and gave rise ‘to the endless creation we see

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 5] =====
REcAPITULATION. 185

in this world. Kalapurusha, and the connection of the various
organs of the body are connected and explained. The names of the
signs, planets, and their divisions are touched upon, and the significa-
tions of the twelve Bhavasor houses areexplained. Then followsa
long list of particulars in the case of planets, which the students

ought to keep in mind. The sexes, characteristics. colors clothes,
metals, ages, places, times, scenes, states, and other particulars of

the planetsare regularly given. To the European readers who go in
for this work—and I have many of them—I would suggest that they
should carefully read all the Slokas except those which simply give
the equivalent names in sanscrit to the Planets and Zodiacal signs.
The rest of the information contained herein is really useful and
must be familiar to the readers, when they begin to read the 2nd
and the following chapters. Venkatasa does not introduce any
portion of mathematics in this work but he asks the readers to know
the graha and Lagna Sphutas and how to find the Bhava Sandhies.
Some of the readers might get the mathematical portion of the work
done by competent siddhantees, and then they may keep their horos-
copes and apply the information herein given by the author of Sar-
warthachintamani in reading their own horoscopes. I shall be happy
to undertake this work on payment of reasonable fees. Constant
reading, as I have said, is necessary. Then Venkatasa gives some
technicalities, and conventionalities which have great significance in
modifying the results of planetary combinations in their general and
special periods. All these details, he says, must be carefully consi-
dered with reference to the planets when their Dasas, Bhukties and
Antaras come in. It is then that the planets show what they are
and how they influence the horoscope. What follows next is not
difficult but it will not be intelligible without a fair knowledge in
this first chapter. That which he has not given here, must be
learnt from other works on the subject.

The End of First Chapter.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 6] =====
Sri
Sarwarthachintamant.

EOL TOOL Ca
CHAPTER II.

a the first Chapter the author elaborately dealt with the zodiacal
a2 signs, constellations, divisions of signs and. their peculiarities,
planets and the numerous details with which they were intimately
connected in moulding the destinies of terrestrial objects. It is
absolutely necessary to know the nature and the peculiarities of
the planets who govern men in the different stages of their deve-
lopment, their adversity, their prosperity and their numerous rela-
tionships. In the following Chapters the learned Venkatasa Dai-
vagnya deals exhaustively with the significations of the houses,
and the results flowing from them with reference to the combina-
tions of planets, the houses they oceupy, the aspects they have and
the strenoth or debility which characterises them. Hindu astro-
logy is immensely old and although he appears to bea very learned
man, hecften has the candour to impress upon the minds of his
readers the fact that he is not an original writer, and that he has
completely drawn his information from the learned Rishis for
whose genius and erudition, he pays the highest respect and alle-
giance. As the Telugu and Devanagari type was very large in the
first chapter, without adding much to the usefulness of the work,
and as many of my subscribers suggested that I could use smaller
type for the same in this and the following chapters I have arranged
to use the ordinary type which will quite suffice for all practical
purposes.

 

102

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 7] =====
138 ॥ SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

भावोदुनानिकैविधान्युव्वित्तानियस्मा

चछाखातरादुषिगणा्यतवुद्धयस्ते ।

यानीहतानिप्रहयोगवशाद्रदति

बुध्यासरमीक्ष्यविदुषांहिमुदे करोमि ॥ १४७॥

Sranza 147.

L shall now state such results of the combinutions of planets in
the different Bhavas as have been eleurly explained in the learned
works of the revered Rishis, which I have been able to collect from
them by my intelligent study aud which I shall now offer to the
educated so that they may be pleased with my work.

NOTES.

Conscious of his own abilities in the astronomical and astro-
logical field, Venkatasa wishes to put forth before his readers that
his object is to intelligently explain to the educated persons what
he has been able to notice as worthy in the astrological works of
the celebrated Maharishis. There may be two interpretations here.
Tf the writings of the Maharishis themselves were clear and easy
for the public there may be very little necessity for a work of this
kind. With a view to simplify matters he may be said to have
undertaken this compilation ; or it may be that, as the Rishi writ-
ings were old and scarce, and that as they were found, by bits here
and fragments there and not in any regular or systematic form or
order of treatment, Venkatasa undertook this compilation to save
the learned from the unnecessary trouble of searching through
various works—many of them incomplete in themselves—and give
them a completed whole from which they may regularly work out
any horoscope and make safe predictions which would be largely
verified. The arrangement he has made in the present work is
certainly commendable and he has collected information which it
is impossible to find in any single work whatever may be its
reputation or merit. His warning that the sources of strength and
weakness of the planets must be first ascertained, and that the
predictions should only be ventured after a thorough knowledge of
these details cannot be too strongly brought to the notice of the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 8] =====
Dirrsrent Buravas. 189

readers and students and I would humbly add my little voice in im-
pressing upon my readers the necessity of remembering these
minute details in the work of past, present or future predictions.

 

 

Heh

भावास्सतेशुभपतियुता वीक्षितावाञुभेशैः

तत्द्भावास्सकरूफल्दाः पापदुग्योगहीनाः ।
पापास्सर्वेभवनपतयश्वेच्ुभास्युस्सपैवं
स्लेटरदुभमापिफलंनीचम्‌ढारिदीने॥ १४८

Stanza 148.

If the different Bhavas are associated with auspicious planets
or owners of good houses, or have their aspects, and if these Bhatas
are not combined with ecil planets ov oreners of evil houses, and have
none of their aspects, they become very goud and produce all the desir-
able results to the native. If the evil planets own good houses they also
Lecome good. Planets which are debilitated, which oceupy enemies?’
houses ani which are combust become productive of unfavourable
results.

NOTES.

In an elaborate work like the one under translation, the
learned Venkatasa has made an omission which is unpardon-
able to some extent. He told us who are the owners of the twelve
Rasees in the first Chapter but he did not tell us, which ownership
produces evil and which produces good. In calculations about
these Bhavadhi Pathies—Significators—he presumes this element-
ary knowledge in his readers. ‘There are two or three ways of
interpretation which it is necessary forthe readers to bear in mind
in reading astrological works, (1) The Bhavas—significations—may
be taken from the Birth or Lagna, (2) they may be taken from the
Moon.or Chundra, or (8) they may also be taken from any one of
the planets with reference to any other of the planets at the time
of birth or question. The positions of planets and their combinai-
tions have the same interpretation. I shall clearly explain by

illustrations what I mean here.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 9] =====
140 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANI.

Take the following horoscope :—~

This is a powerful horoscope and is well worthy of examina-
tion. Birth is n Taurus and therefore it becomes the first Bhava

from which the significations in- (= pn 7
dicated by the ascendant have to R ४0 i र ‘il
be examined. The second is |

Gemini and it is occupied by Sun, |
Saturn. The third, fourth and [Jupiter
fifth are blank, the sixth is oceu- | ल~ । 19806 172. |
pied by Mars and Kethu, the | cury il 0
seventh is blank, and the 8th is | वी |

|

]

 

occupied by Venus, 9th is free,
and the 10th is occupied by the
Sun, Mercury and Jupiter, the Ma
llth is blank and the 12th is | Venus: Kethu.
occupied by the Moon and Rahu.
These Bhavas form one set with reference to Lagna signification
The ownerships for this are—Venus is the lord of birth and 6th,
Mercury owns 2nd and 5th, Moon owns the 3rd, the Sun is the lord
of the 4th, Mars owns the 7th and 12th, Jupiter owns Sth and
llth and Saturn rules the 9th and 10th houses. Lords of the 3rd,
6th, 8th and 12th with the lord of the 11th are evil. The lords
of the 5th and 9th are good. ‘The lords of Ist, 4th, 7th and 10th,
when benefics become evil, when malefics become good. The lord
of the 2nd becomes good or evil according to associations, positions
and aspects. Here therefore, Moon and Jupiter are thoroughly
evil, Mars is ordinary as he owns a quadrant 7th, and an evil house
12th, and the Sun is good because he rules the 4th, Saturn is tho-
roughly good as he owns 9th and 10th houses, Mercury is partly |
good as he owns the 2nd and 5th and Venus is bad as he rules the
Ist and 6th houses. These are the Bhavas which we see when
examined in the light of Lagne. Now the 2nd set of Bhavas is
to be calculated with reference to the position of the Moon at
the time of birth and they will be thus noticed. Moon is in Mesha
and it becomes the birth or Chundralagna, the 2nd and 7th Bhavas
Taurus and Libra are ruled by Venus, the 2rd and 6th are governed
by Mercury, the 4th by Moon himself, the 5th by the Sun, the Ist
and 8th Aries and Scorpio by Mars, the 9th and 12th by Jupiter
and the 10th and the llth by Saturn. ‘Thus those who become

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 10] =====
¢

Buava SIGNIFIcATIONS. 141

good and evi! planets in this case are—the Sun ruling the 5th be-
comes good, Jupiter and Saturn are ordinary as the former owns the
9th and 12th houses and the latter owns the 10th and 11th houses.
Mercury, lord of 3rd and 6th, and Venus, lord of 2nd and 7th are
thoroughly bad. Then again these Bhavas may be taken with
reference to each other of the planets who occupy houses in the
zodiac at the time of birth or query. ‘Take Guru. He is the lord
of the 2nd and Lith houses from the Sun (who is in Aquarius)
and he is with the Sun. The Bhavams he owns riz. 2nd and 1 1111
from the Sun are bad while his position with the Sun is good.
Sani is in the 5th house from the Sun, but he owns Kumbha and
Makara or the Ist and 12th houses from the Sun. This ownership
is bad. The Sun is in the 9th from Saniand Sani is in the 5th
from the Sun. Take Sukra. He isin Dhanas. Guru owns the
Ist and 4th signs from him and therefore becomes bad. But Guru
is in the 38rd from Sukra and Sukra is in the 1!th from Guru.
These positions are favourable. Where the planets occupy the 2nd,
12th, 6th or 8th houses from each other at the time of birth or
query they become bad and produce evil to some extent. All these
different Bhavas must be taken into consideration in determining the
extent of good and evil which planets may be disposed to give. The
combination of Buda and Ravi in the 10th would have been more
powerful if Gurn had not joined them. He is the lord of the Sth
and 11th from Lagna, of 9th and 12th from Chundra, and of 2nd
and 1lith from Ravi and Buda and therefore he has taken away १,
great deal of the power which the combination of the lords of the
4th (Sun) and 5th (Mercury) would otherwise have given.

T have explained these ownerships and the results they pro-
duce clearly in my notes on Jatakachundrika, (2nd Edition. p- P- 6
to 21 and stanzas 5 to 21) to which I beg to refer my readers.
This knowledge of ownership is absolutely necessary for under-
standing the force of these Bhavas and Bhayadhipathies.

+ ॥ ॥ , has
If any house (signification) is occupied by a good planet ¢
0110८ tor

its lord powerful and benefics aspect it, the results menti a
that Bhavam will he what may be desired. In the blo, oe
above given let me take the Vidrabhavam or the signific®

qa F
न 1८: Or
education. This is signified by the 4th house. The K*

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 11] =====
142 SaARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

Vidya or lord of education is Guru, and the Karaka or lord for
intelligence or Fragnra is Buda. 2nd is the house of speech and
education in a general way and the 5th house indicates the state
of intelligence. We have here a splendid combination for educa-
tion, intelligence and general ability. The lord of the 2nd and 5th
is Buda who is also the lord of intelligence, the lord of 4th is the
Sun, and the lord of education Guru—who owns two evil houses—
are all occupying the 10th house from Lagna and 11th from
Chundra and ave aspecting the house of education—4th. The
gentleman in question is an highly educated, extremely intelligent
and well known person and has a great fame as an author: The 2nd
house is occupied by Sani; but aspected by Guru and Sukra both
excellent planets.

Kvil planets when they own good houses like quadrants or
trines produce also good. Debilitated planets, planets in conjunc-
tion with evil planets or with Ravi and planets who occupy un-
friendly houses are productive of unfavourable results. The au-
thor here gives a general summary, as it were, to enable a student
at once to see what kind of results may be expected from the
ownership, occupation, association and aspects of the planets. This
applies to all the Bhavas and therefore is of special importance
which has to be kept in the mental view of the student as he
progresses in his astrological studies and ventures on into the re-
gions of predictions.

 

 

702

ङूगनादिमावद्विपुरप्ररिष्फे

पापग्रहास्तद्वनाधिनाथाः ।

तीम्यास्तुनायंतफल्प्रदास्त

दरावादिकानांफलमेवमाहुः ॥ १४९ ॥

Stranzs 149.

Neil planets oceupying or owning 6th, 8th, and 12th houses from
Lagna produce unfavourable results. Good planets occupying or own-
ing 6th, 8th and 12th houses from Lagna, do not produce much .good.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 12] =====
Dirrerent Boavas. 143

NOTES.

The stanza is curiously worded in Sanskrit and requires a little
explanation. The author makes a distinction between evil and
good planets, in their occupations and ownership of 6th, 8th, and
12th houses from the birth or Lagna. Evil planets refer to Ravi,
Kuja, Sani, Rahu, Kethu, Kshinachundra, or new moon and pupa-
yukta, Buda or badly associated Mercury. Buda himself is + oum-
ya or good. In good company like that of Guru, Sukra. or Poorna
Chundra, (full moon) or when he is exalted or in his own house or
Moolathrikona he is good. Guru and Sukraare alwaysbenetics and
even when they are debilitated or associated they are benefics but
with a limited power to do good, ‘The lordship of the 6th, 8th and
12th is bad, and planets in the 8th and 12th houses are also bad.
But what about the results of planets—evil—who occupy the 6th
house. In the Astrological Magazine in Vol. II, I pointed out the
two schools of astrology who hold contrary views. vil planets in
the 6th house are said to produce good. Some assert that good
planets in the 6th produce evil. Taking the general principles of
astrology it may be asserted that when evil planets occupy any
houses the results indicated by those Bhavas are destroyed or
are largely diminished. On the other hand if good planets occupy
any houses they produce good in matters which are ascribed to
those Bhavas. ‘ake the 6th house. It denotes debt, disease, and
enemies principally. If evil planets occupy this house, by the
above principle these significations are destroyed and indirectly the
man becomes happy. A man whose enemies are ruined, whose
debts are destroyed, and whose disease is put down, certainly feels
quite comfortable. On the other hand if the good planets are
placed in the 6th, they increase the three items which are mentiou-
ed above, But some astrological authors assert that good planets
produce the reverse results in the 6th house. They are good by
nature, and good means the destroying of evil and creation of cir-
cumstances which are favourable to the native. Thus if Jupiter is
in the 6th, he destroys the debts, enemies and complaints of the
man and gives him happiness. 6th house also is included in the
Oopachayas or improving houses. In Adhiand Vasumathi Yogas,
good planets are recommended in the 6th house. Thus there are
conflicting views on this most important question and I would re-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 13] =====
144, SARWABTHAOHINTAMANI,

fer my readcrs to the articles on this vital point in the Astrologi-
cal Magazine. My own views will be expressed later on. The
author says that evil planets owning or occupying the 3 Dusthanas
or the 6th, 6th and 12th houses are productive of evil. If auspici-
ous plancts are found there or own those houses, they cannot pro-
duce much good. It means, I suppose, that they produce good but
not in an iutensified form. There is really much difference be-
tween the occupation of the 8th and 1{th by the malefic and bene-
fic planets. lf Mars or Saturn occupies the 8th, death is nearer
than when the same house is occupied by Guru. Such controver-
sial or doubtful points must be carefully remembered.

107

 

THAT A CGA
दुस्थानपोयद्धवनीस्थतोवा |
तद्धानिनार कथयीततत्‌न्ना

सशुमेक्ितेत इवनस्यसीख्यं ॥ १९५० ॥

Sranza, 190.

Tf the lord of uny Bhava occupies the 6th, 8th and 18th house, or
if the lords of those houses oceupy any other Bhava, the results will be
unfavourable. funy Bhavu hus the aspect of the yood planets it will
thrive well.

NOTES.

There nay be two interpretations for this Stanza. The Bha-
vas may be taken either with reference to the planetary houses at
the time of birth or with reference to the Lagna. Here instead of
straining the meaning, it would look most natural if we took the
ordinary meaning ri:. counting from the Lagna. Even then there
may be a double interpretation.

A horoscope will well illustrate the meaning. The author says
that the significations of those houses which are occupied by the
lords of Dusthanas are sure tosuffer. The lord of the sixth is
Ravi and he occupies the third house which shows sisters, broth-
ers and courage and length of life. If Ravi had alone occupied

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 14] =====
Dirrerent Baavas. 145
| पव Se Ps = the 8rd house, all those events
Lagna. (| 11 signified by the Sahaja Bhava
| i mM would have suffered heavily. But

 

/॥ || Moon is with him and is exalted
प. | there. But those events signi-
fied by that house have suffered a
great deal. Take the lord of
the Sth Venus. He occupies the
||| 4th house. 4th house indicates
| | Guru.

mother, happiness, education, con-

veyances, lands, relations, &ec., and
as a Dusthanadhipathi has occupied it all these have suffered.
The person lost mother early and he had broken a2dueation.

 

 

Kethu.

 

}
|
॥

 

Take the lord of the 12th Saturn He occupies the 2nd house
indicative of speech, cloqnence, wealth, cyes, family and so forth.
All these have suffered to some extent by the evil influences of
Sani owning the 12th house and occupring the 2nd. This is the
most approved meaning. The second house is aspeeted by Guru,
and is joined by Buda. Both are good and the Bhava has not
altogether been unsuccessful. The 4th house has also the aspect
of Guru and it is partly successful. All that the author means to
say is that, for any Bhava to be successful, it must not be combined
with the lords of the «th, Sth or 12th houses; nor should the lord
of that Bhava occupy the 6th, 8th or 12th houses. Any Bhava
which has beneficial aspect will thrive well. In the above men-
tioned horoscope the lord of the birth is Guru and he is in the 8th
which is bad.

 

203

 

TAR AAA TGAAAAT ATS TTA |
पापानां ष्टिदीने नवपतित्तहिते पापवेटैरयुक्तै ॥ १५१ ॥
Sranza 151,

If the lords of the Bhavas, occupy trines, their own house, 4th
7th or 10th houses, have the conjunction of benefies without the
aspects of evil planets, and are joined by the lord of the 9th house,
without the conjunction of malefics, such Bhavas will prosper well and

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 15] =====
146 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL.

indicate happiness. If the lords of the Bhavas have good and evil
aspects or associations they will indicate mixed results,

NOTES.

The line of argument is pretty plain. Tf the lord of any
Bhava occupies 1, 4, 7, 10: 9, 5, or joins the lord of the 9th
house and has the aspect and conjunction of good planets, those
results indicated by that Bhavam will he eminently successful. In
this case as well as in all other cases, the Bhavas as well as their
lords must be free from evil conjunctions or evil aspects. Take any

Bhava. In Sanskrit a Bhava

 

 

 

 

means any zodiacal sign. Bha- ~~ Rahu. धि
vas may be taken fromthe Lag- |__|

na or from the planets themselves: प
Both must be consulted. If we Died in 1891 | °°" "*
take the Lagna Bhava, itis placed =[-——— inhis

 

in Libra (Thulu). Its lord isin | gain | (पावः | Kujo.
the 10th house from Lagna, and
he is auspicious. He has the as-
pect of Saturn and the person
had some complaint or other,
although the presence of Jupiter in Lagna gave generally sound
health. If we take the 8th Bhava it is Vrishabha, the house of
Ayush or longevity. Sukra owns two honses and it has been
shown that he isin the !0th from Lagna. But from the 8th
which is also his he occupies a good position, #. ¢., the 3rd from
the 8th and this is good- Take the 5th house the Bhava denoting
children The lord of the 5th is in the 12th from it, although in
this case Sani owns Kumbha and Makara and is in his own house.
As he occupied a bad sign from the 5th, and the fifth house is
aspected by Kuja and Guru, and its lord Sani by Sukra, the person
lost half the number of children, oue of whom was a grown up
woman. Take the Karma Bhava. Its lord is Moon, and he occu-
pies the 10th from his own house, is placed in the 7th from Lagna,
and has the aspect of Guru, without any evil planetary cunjunc-
tions or aspects, the man had a steady and a successful government
service and retired honorably from it. If the same Moon had evil
aspects and. occupied 6th, 8th and 12th houses from the 10th, the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 16] =====
Dirrerent Bravas. 147

person would have had a checkered life, losing service and getting
it again or what we call the tips and downs in life more frequent-
ly than is desirable. The lord of the 5th is Sani. His occupation
of the 12th from Kumbha is bad. In the first case he is to be
taken from the Lagna, and that denotes the first Bhavam. Then
his position must be taken with reference to his house. Sani occu-
pies the 4th house from Lagna and that denotes happiness. The
person therefore had honor through his sons, oue of whom became
famous. The author says that the junction of the lord of any
Bhava with the lord of the $th is favourable. An illustration of
it is found in the horoscope. Budais the lord of the 9th, and
with him is found the Sun the lord of the Labha-Bhava (11111
house) and he was good in his periods and sub-periods. It looks
as if there is a little repetition in the author’s stanzas, but where
the ideas are twice repeated, they are done so purposely to draw
the attention of the reader and show their importance. Where these
Bhavas or their lords have good and bad together, it is asserted
that the results willbe of a mixed nature. Taking the lord of the
5th Bhava he is found in the 12th from him. That is bad. He
happens to be Sani which is bad also. He has the aspect of Venus,
it is good. He is in his own house whichis good. An evil planet in
a Kendra is bad, but Sani owns the 4th and 5th houses and it is
good. The Bhava is aspected by Guru and it is good, but it is also
aspected by Kuja and this is bad. In this manner, collecting the
good and evil results, it is found that the Putra Bhaca or house of
children is mixed and the results as a matter of fact were mixed.

 

--:0:--

 

भावानांपुष्ठिमाहुरस्तकलङुभकरोचान्यथाचेत्पमणाञ्चो |
मिश्रमिश्रग्रहैदै स्सकर्मपिफलमूतिभावादि कानां ॥ १५२ ॥

87414. 152. .

Tf the lord of any Bhava occupies the 8th house, or is in combust
with the sun) or occupies a debilitated sign, or occupies an enemy's
house, without the association or aspect of beneficial planets, those
results which are indicated by that Bhavam will be utterly unfavour-
able, or they will produce much misery.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 17] =====
150 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

profession would suit him ? what influence does he command ? and
how best he could struggle for existence in this world? are some
of the most vital points on which astrology ought to throw the
greatest light possible. If really astrology can benefit mankind, it
is here that it will have the most extensive opportunities to do its
useful work. Persons educate their children without knowing in
what station of life they will be placed and what kind of education
would help them in their future career. This gross ignorance of
the parents is unpardonable when astrology can be utilised with
great advantage and profit to themselves and their children. Boys
have so many tastes and dislikes. The sphere of life where they
can best succeed is utterly unknown to them as well as to their
parents. A may have taste for music. ‘his will depend upon
the strength or weakness of the 4th house and its lord. But with
a taste in music, he may be successful as a doctor, a lawyer, a
merchant, an officer, a military man, or even as a cobbler. That
ealling will pay him best which is commanded by the lord of the 10th
house. The author, with a view to cover all possible combinations
on this most vital question in life, gives various alternatives. He
first asks the student to find out who occupies the 10th house from
Lagna. Ifthere are no planets in the 10th from Lagna, he advises
the reader to search for planets in the 10th house from Chandra.

3ut suppose there are no planets in the 10th house from either of
these two, then, he takes the student through a long line into the
Navamsa and adds the house occupied by the Sun also to the above
two. When the :Uth louse from Lagna, Ravi and Chundra is
without a planet then we are asked to find out in what Navamsa
the lords of the 10th houses from the above, are situated, and
then describe such means of livelihood as are prescribed to the
lord of the Nayamsa, which is occupied by the lord of the 10th
from Lagna, Chundra and Ravi. I shall first take the ordinary
Bhava. If there is the Sun in the 10th from Lagna the person
gets wealth through his father or paternal relations. If there is
Mcon, through his mother, if there is Mars, the person gets
wealth by conquering his enemies. If thereis Buda, wealth comes
through friendly circles, if there is Guru, wealth can be expected
from brothers and cousins, if there is Sukra, through female
agency and if Saturn through his servants or dependants, The

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 18] =====
SovgcEs OF WEALTH. 151

quantity and frequency of getting wealth largely depends upon
the strength and position of the planets. If the Sun is exalted
and well aspected and occupies 10th owning a good sign, the
paternal wealth will be enormous and the person will be extremely
lucky. If on the other hand the Sun is debilitated and aspected
by evil planets, there will hardly be any paternal estate and even
if it comes there will be much anxiety and litigation about it and
it eventually disappears, leaving the man in his criginal state.

If there are two or more planets in the 10th then wealth
flows in from thoge sources which are ascribed to the planets there.
First the student should examine which is the strcnger of the
two—Lagna or Chundra. Then he must find out which of the
planets in the 10th from birth or Mocn is streng and ascribe the
acquisition of wealth accordingly. This will be the predominating
source of his income. So far the matter is easy and the readers
ean comprehend it If there are no planets in the i0th house
either from birth cr from Chundra then the ‘0th from the Sun
may be considered. Butifeven there, planets are not found ;
then the author refers to the Navamsas. ‘lake the three places,
Lagna, Chundra and Ravi at the time of birth and find out
which of them is the strongest. Then take the lord ef 16 101
from the strongest of the three above named and find out which
Navamsa he occupies. Then find out the lord of the Navamsa
oceupied by the above planet and ascribe the acquisiticn of wealth
by the person from those means which are indicated by the lord
of that Navamsa. One cr two illustrations will make this point
clear. Take the horoscope given under stanza 150.

The horoscope runs thus in Rasee and Navamsa diagrams.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

oS [cm ॥ Bey [rane ~ [Chun-]
८ Sani Rahu Ravi | ी
Birth. Chun- 8 ~ | पिपर. | dra.
iil Buda. | Fu ukra. पप्पु | | | (आ
Kuja
—— Rasee. | | Navamsa.
| Sani
| Buda.
etn) | Guru. | Kethu.| Birth.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 19] =====
152 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

In this illustrative horoscope the reader has to carefully note
the line of argument in explanation of the author’s meaning in the
above stanza. The means of acquiring wealth will be those which
are ascribed to the planets occupying the !0th house from Birth,
Chundra or Ravi. If there are no planets there, then find out
which of the above three, is the strongest by conjunction, aspect-
ing and other sources of strength mentioned in the first Chapter.
Then take the lord of the 10th from that, and find out where he
is situated in the Navamsa. And after finding out his occupation
in the Navamsa, take the lord of the house he is situated and as-
cribe to the person those means of acquiring wealth which are
governed by that planet. This is rather a round about process
and may not be intelligible without proper illustrations. In the
present horoscope, take birth first and examine its streneth. The
lord of birth or Meena is Guru and he occupies Thula—an unfriendly
house, and is in the 8th from Lagna. He is therefore weak. Be-
sides he is aspected by three evil planets Sani and Buda in the 7th
and Kuja in the 4th. There are no beneficial aspects. Therefore
the lord of the 10th from I.agna cannot be taken as Lagna is weak
and its lord is powerless. There are no planets in the 10th from
Lagna, but there is Kethu, a planet who is supposed to give the
phalam of the lord of the house he occupies and of those planets
who aspect or combine with him. Here the lord of Dhanas is
Guru and we have found that Guru is not strong and accordingly
rejected him. Now take Ravi. The 10th house from him is
vacant. Navi is the lord of the 6th from Lagna and he occupies
an unfriendly house. ‘That is bad. He is besides with Kshina
Chundra (weak moon) and occupies Meena Navamsa with Kuja
an evil planet. His position inthe 3rd house is good, and
balancing all sources of strength and weakness he cannot bo taken.
Chundra is the lord of the 5th house, is in exaltation although
with the Sun and therefore weak, occupies a friendly Navamsa
with the benefic Guru with him ; His exaltation, his owning the fifth
house, and his conjunction with Gurn, in the Amsa gives him
better strength than that which is possessed either by Lagna or
by Bavi. Therefore taking from Chundra the 10th house is
Kumbha and its lord is Sani. Going to the Navamsa Sani is
found in Simha (Leo) with Buda. According to the stanza above

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 20] =====
Souag Inrivenons. 158

explained, the lord of that house which is occupied by Saturn will
determine the means of acquiring wealth. He is found to be the
Sun. The person therefore pursues those means to get money
which are ascribed to the Sun. I believe I have made the mean-
ing of the stanza clear and another illustration is unnecessary.
Refer to Bhattotpala’s commentaries on Brihatjataka (Vide Chap.
X, Brihatjataka of Varaha Mihira-)

 

i

 

भैषज्य्वाभाकरतोययान पण्येनमुक्तामाणविप्ररुमात्‌ ।
दूतागमानलबायकवृत्तिमागौ ज्जीवयततौवासरनायकाशे ॥ १५४ ॥

मंत्रोपदे शरसवादविनोदरमर्गै
रावृत्तिमिस्तकलकशाखपुराणमार्भैः |
जञानोपदे शनिपुणः क्षितिपाद्पुज्यो
जीवयसावितिवदैदहिननायकांओे ॥ १९९ ॥

Svanzas 154 & 155.

If the Lord of the Naramsa, occupied by the lord of the 10th
from birth, Sun, or Moon happens to be the Sun the person follows
medicine, or seller of medical stores, gold or goldmining, merchandise
on water, war, gems and pearls, helping gamblers, and lovers, lawful
merchandise, counselling or instructing, chemical experiments, coawing
or playiug the part of a humorist, learned in all the Shastras and
respected by kings or high personages.

NOTES.

In the translation I have necessarily to be brief at the cost of
lucidity. The author first gives the profession of a man when the
Sun rules the Navamsa.

Tf the lord of the Navamsa, occupied by the lord of the 10th
from Birth, Sun or Moon happens to be the Sun, the person be-
comes 2 doctor or seller of medicines and medical stores, he will
either be a chemist, or one who helps chemical experimentalists,
he will be a dealer in gold, or will be connected with some gold-
mining industries, he will deal with ships or be a merchant, he
will be a counseller, or one who instructs higher personages in

3

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 21] =====
184 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANT.

the discharge of their individual affairs or in their discharge of
government or political affairs, he will be engaged in war, or will
be connected with war department, he will be a dealer in gems,
pearls and other precious articles, he will be a helper to gamblers
and lovers, and thus, make money through them, he will get money
through humouring big men or kings, will be learned and will
command wealth through his proficiency, or finally will be
attached to some court or royal personage and get his livelihood
through employment there. In Sanskrit the word <Adyai
is used which means—and so forth or, etc. ‘Therefore some more
professions may also be included in those already named above.
Apparently there appears to be some variations between these re-
sults and those predicted by the author of Jatakachundrika, who
follows closely Parasara’s doctrine. He says that the combination
of the lords of the 9th and 10th will produce Rajayoga, wherever
those two planets may be combined. Suppose the two methods
give different Phalam one pointing to Rajayoga, and the other
pure merchandise ? Here there will be an obvious difficulty. But
really there will be none at all. A man may be an important
government servant and still get money through merchandise di-
rectly or indirectly. Ie may be an officer and still take great fan-
cy for music, gambling, love making, tanning leathers, astronomy,
astrology, travelling, trading in gems and pearls, merchandise in
ships and various other concerns. An officer frequently sells his
horses, harness, jewels, wife, daughters, sisters and furniture and
makes larger profits than his pay or those which would have been
made by an ordinary merchant. Another succeeds in getting
at a rich widow and plays the role of a gallant and makes money.
One rises to eminence by pimping to his superiors or his kings
Another makes wealth by taking advantage of his official position
and collecting gems, jewels or gold through fair or foul means.
There are therefore so many ways of making money sepa-
rately, although a person may have a definite position in life.
All these depend upon the strength of the combination of the lords
of trines and quadrants and that of the lord of the 10th or the
planet there, or the lord of the Navamsa, where the lord of the
10th is found at the time of birth. These are important matters
which are well worth careful perusal and I draw the attention of

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 22] =====
GAINS FROM VARIOUS CALLINGS. 155

my readers to these stanzas. It is a well known fact in the affairs
of the world that an influential person becomes influential by his
underhand dealings, by having to do something secretly while he
holds a respectable government or other mercantile office, that
often he combines in himself multifarious functions, that besides
his pay his employers sometimes pay him commission, allowances
batta and other sums, and that a man may be connected with 10
or 12 different and radically opposed callings, making money
through all of them, while, holding a general and recognised spe-
cial calling. In fact if we enter into the history of professions by
which men manage to live, we hardly find any one individual living
entirely by one specialised means. The king has his own private
estates, his inclination to take shares in companies and enccurag-
ing industries and taking part in them not as a sovereign power
but as a private citizen. A high functionary holds several build-
ings, gets rent from them and from his extensive lands and makes
profits from shares he may have purchased in companies and spe-
culations. An official may get his regular salary and hare lands
and money dealings. A merchant may have lands, and some go-
vernment honorarium in the shape of small allowance for his trou-
ble from the government. So that if we carefully examined the
sources of income of many persons in the world, we find that those
sources of income will generally be not confined to one single avo-
cation or calling, but will have included various means and ways.
These differences are due to the fact that it is hardly pcssible to
find one planet occupring the 10th exclusively without conjunc-
tions or aspects of other planets. In the Navamsa the complica-
tions are still greater, and the skill of the astrologer consists in
properly reading the particular influences of the planets in their
general, sub and other minor periods. No amount of care and
devotion bestowed upon this important subject could be consi-
dered illspent. I would strongly request the readers to perused
these and the previous stanzas, carefully before they venture on to
predictions.
10:

 

 

नरोद्ूवानांक्रयविक्रयेण रषेसमुत्पनविनोदमार्गात्‌ ।
राजांगनासंश्रयवृत्तिरूपा नि शाकराशोवसनक्रियायाः ॥ १९६ ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 23] =====
156 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI-

Stanza 156.

Tf the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 10th is
Moon, the person trades in shells, pearls, corals and other articles
born or taken out of water, by cultivation, by exhibiting various shows,
by insinuating himself into the favour of royal females or females in
high rank and by trading in clothes, Se.

- NOTES.

Even fishes, sea herbs, and other articles found in deep water,
may be classed under (jaludbharas) or those born in water. By
wit, humour, or by appealing to various senses of the body, a man
may acquire wealth- Shows of all kinds come up under this elassi-
fication. Merchandise in all varieties of clothes, and acting as the
agent, confidant or gallant with women in exalted position, he will
be able to earn money. With women in high rank, the person
might get into various relationships. He may act as their paramour
their pimp, their agent, or their humourist and acquire money
through that source. The strength of the planet decides the extent
of respect and the amount of money he may be able to secure.

i eee

 

धातोनिवदेनरणप्रहारा तप्ताभिवादात्कर्टप्रियाद्रा |
जीवयततौसाहसमार्रूपा STATUS AMT ॥ १९५७ ॥

Sranza 157.

If Mars happens to be the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the 10th house, he trades in minerals of vartous kinds, or war
implements ; he jinds employment in Military department, and all
other undertakings which involve courage, Jighting and danger, all
services where fire plays an important part, in picking quarrels and
setting up quarrels, athletic sports and exercises and by. robbery or
thieving.

NOTES. ,

Mars plays an important part. He commands, he ‘kills, he
beats, he is beaten, he plunders, he robs, he burns, and in fact his
hand is in every work where there is, blood, bones, fire, property,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 24] =====
Mercurial AND Jovian INFLUENCES. 157

or empires. On a small scale robbery is thieving, on a large scale
it is empire-building and conquest worthy of even the best and the
grestest heroes. Wherever blood is spilt, bones are broken, wee-
pons are made or used, property is gained or lost, fires consume,
or are used in manufactures, engines, kitchens and other work,
there will be Mars found. He has also the command of all mine-
rals, some of which are deadly poisons. Thus all men in the
military, police, engineering, robbing, extorting, fightiny or en-
gaged in burning and poisoning practices, are under the Martian
influence. They earn money and live by those means or related
to such measures and make money through them.

(I --- --

रिस्पादिशाघ्नागमकान्यमा्गां TTT TAT |
पराध्यैवेदाध्ययनाज्जपा च पुरोहितव्याजवश्चाचवृत्तिः ॥ १९८ ॥

Sranza 158.

Tf Merewry happens to be the lord of the Naramsu oceupied by the
lord of the 10th, he inclines the man to do painting, writing books, com-
posiny poetry, astronomy and astrology, learning Vedas and Shastras
follow priestly work, missionary labours, and offering prayers for the
sake of money.

NOTES.

There is not a tinge of military aspect in the case of Mercury.
Missionaries, priests, chaplains, bishops, purohits, religious men who
put on that mask for earning money, astrologers and astronomers,
authors and painters of all grades, learned in the religious lore,
who make a living by thut means, are all under Mercurial control.
Tf Mercury is exalted the followers will be respected and will be
sincere men. If he is debilitated they will be contemptible fellows
who put on the religious mask to sérve their ends.

 

203

 

जीबांशकेमूपुरदेवताना मुपार्तकाध्यापकपरगरूपात्‌ |
पुशणशाख्ञागमनीतिमागौं द्रमोपदेशनचवृत्तिमहुः ॥ १९९. ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 25] =====
158 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

Sranza 159.

If the lord of the Navansa is Jupiter he induces the person to give
religious instruction for wealth, read Puranas for income, teach mora-
lity for consideration, become secretaries and members of charitable
institutions for personal interests, succeed to high priest hood for his
benefit and thas make his livelihood.

NOTES.

There is a grand difference between jupiter and other planets.
All-of them hare worldly considerations. But although jupiter
takes money for the trouble, he labours in a moral and elevated
sphere ; and it will produce much good upon those who are in-
structed by him. Suppose a man wants good moral lessons and
pays to his instructor. For the money he spends he gets a splen-
did return which has a permanent value in his life, and which
alters the tone of his whole future career. The money therefore
is well earned and the labour produces much moralising effect. 16
the instruetcr or moralist or priest be sincere he will be all the
more meritorious. Ifhe is not he gets less merit. But those `
who are instructed will he largely profited.

 

30%

 

सुवणमाणिक्यगजाश्चमाव्यादुगवांक्याज्जीवनमाहुरा्या : |
डदधोदकक्षीरदधिक्रयेन च्ियःप्रलेमिनमृगोर्मवशि ॥ १६० ॥

Stanza 160.

If the lovd of the Naramsa oceupied by the lord of the 10th from
Birth, Moon or Sun is Venus the person lives by trading in
gold, in precious stones, in elephants, horses, flowers, cows and cattle,
in fresh water, or clean water, milk, curds and in depending upon
women or through their injluence,

NOTES.

Each of these planets controls a lot of other professions, which
are not explained here by the author but which can be easily clas-
sified under the characteristics of the particular planet. Venus
is a fine planet. Merchandise in diamonds, rubies, sapphires,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 26] =====
Sarosyive INFLUENCES. 159

emeralds and other precious gems, trading in gold, elephanis,
horses, flowers of all kinds, cattle, specially cows and buffaloes,
fresh water and all purified or filtered waters, milk and curds.
all these and many more are under the influence of Venus.
Besides these another profession is mentioned which is depending
upon the favours of women. In the last case the strength of the
planet Venus determines the honourableness of the connection, Ji
Venus is weak or with evil planets the person lives by the gains of

her prostitution. He may be a dependent upon actresses, or danc-
ing women, or a master pimp.

 

3c:

 

शन्यंशकेकरुत्सितमाग॑वृदया रिनल्पादिभिदीरमवेधाचैः।
विन्यस्तभाराज्जनविप्ररंमा दन्योन्यवैरो द्रवमागैमूल्मत्‌ ॥ १६१ ॥

Stanza 161.

If the lord of the Navamsu occupied by the owner of the 10th
from Birth, Moon or Sun be Saturn he acyuires money by cdis-
graceful professions, by working in wood or other mean materials, by
killing birds and bests, by inflicting wounds wpun himself, by carrying
loads for cooly or as a labourer or by walking on foot, or by setting
up quarrels among persons.

NOTES.

Saturn gives a sorry profession and the means employed will
be those which are generally considered low by the class to which
the person belongs. There are some honourable professions
although they may not be very remunerative. Thus the school-
master might get 10 rupees a month and a scavenger might make
double or treble of what the teacher might expect. But the
teacher’s post is honourable while that of the scavenger is consi-
dered very low, if not disgraceful, by every civilised nation. World
presents a variety of avocations some of which are considered
conventionally honourable while others are mean. Saturn is for

giving mean kind of work. ‘There are some busy bodies who clev-

erly trade upon the brains of others and their weaknesses. Doing

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 27] =====
160 CaARWARTHAOHINGAMANT.

no good work they set up quarrels, rouse bad passions in the com-
batants and make capital out of such quarrels. Killing—not as
warriors on the battlefield—in cold blood, executioner’s work, or
butchering for the sake of selfish gain, going in the streets as
mendicants, inflicting bruises upon their own bodies and rousing
the sympathy of passers by and making money by this hateful
practice, the ordinary coolies who toil day and night to maintain
themselves, these and similar others are under the influence of
Saturn. In the examination of a horoscope, the 10th house signi-
fies employment and consequently means of livelihood. Every one
in this world must admit that this is a very important item in
man’s existence. Success and failure here have a great bearing upon
man’s happiness and misery and these stanzas therefore become
very important. In my humble opinion, as one who have had
experience in astrological calculations and predictions over 8 quar- `
ter of a century, it may be pointed out that those persons who have
their 10th houses from Lagna or Moon occupied by planets have
always been more influential than those who have no planets in
them. Jf all the planets oceupy 9th, 10th and 11th houses the
person specially distinguishes himself as a greatman whatever may
be his surroundings at the time of birth, the degree of success
yarying with the strength or debility of the planets eccupying the
10th house. If the Sun, Mars, or bright or full Moon oecupies the
10th, without evil aspects and in friendly houses they give the
native continuous success and desirable influence among his class-
mates and friends. If evil planets occupy the 10th debilitated,
aspeeted by other evil planets similarly weakened; whatever may
be the position in life at the time of birth, the person loses all and
gets into public disgrace or will have too many ups and downs in
life to make it endurable or smooth.

 

0————

स्वकतरेस्वनवांशकेसुदृदि वास्वातुयचभागेयथा ।
RATAN Aaa HTT MGA | “
तत्तक्तारवरान्वितास्तुखचरास्तत्तलवांशाधिषा |
तस्ुभदातुस्लपाकसमयष्वतदशाधोश्वराः ॥ १६२ ॥ .

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 28] =====
Vazious KENDS OF INFLUENCES. 161

Sranza 162.

Planets who are in their houses, in their Naramsas, in friendly
signs, in their swochas (deep exaltations), in their Drakkanas, in qua-
drants, in their Movlathrikonas and also the lords uf the Nawamsas
they occupy, give good results aceurding to the sie sourees of strength
they possess (shadbulas) in their Dasas and Antardasas (periads and
sub-periods).

NOTES.

This and the following few stanzas treat of a most important
subject which can engage the attention of the astrological readers.
There are three kinds of influences which have to be carefully
considered, First the influences of the planets as fixed at the time
of birth in the horoscope ; second the influences in their periods
and sub-periods and third the influences of the planets as they are
moving from year to year, from inonth to month and from day to
day. There are other influences which have also to be taken into
consideration, but I need not confuse the subject at present with too
many sources of knowledge. Take any horoscope. At the time of
birth two or three planets may be in exaltation, one or two in their
own houses, one or twoin debilitation and the rest in friendly or
unfriendly houses. These positions of the planets are permanent and
fixed, and they all exercise influences on the uative who enjoys the
resultant of all their work. This will be the influence—general—
at the time of birthand after birth the native is ruled by the periods
of the lords who govern the constellation at the time of birth and
the next eight constellations if he lives up to 120 years and odd
days. This is what is commonly known as vimsottare (120 years)
calculated by the Oodu Dasa (stellar period) system generally
prevalent in the whole of S. India and Dekkan. In N. India
these periods and sub-periods are similarly referred to birth and
the following constellations but the total number of years is 108
under the name 4siota7?. There is a third method recommended,
in the Brihat-jajgka and other works (vide B. Jataka Ch. VILL.
Si. 1.) This has no reference to birth and the following constella-
tions, Here birth (agua), Moon and Sun are taken and their
relative strengths are determined. The first Dasa is given to the
strongest.of the three named above and the extent of the period

4

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 29] =====
162 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANI.

will be the number-of years, months, days, &e., which have been
given by the most powerful of these three in Grahadatta Pindayur-
daya or the extent of life given by it to the foetus in the womb.
The next Dasa will be that of the planet who is strongest in the
quadrants. After giving Dasas to all the planets in the quadrants
take the planets in the houses next to quadrants and after
them those which are in Anpollibas or next to them. (Seep 59).
In Jaimini Sutras the Dasas are differently given, and in Kala-
chakra Vakyas periods are ascribed in a different method. Any
one of these, if properly understood, will be sufficient and will be
found quite correct. Thus the influence of the periods and sub-
periods are very important in moulding man’s prospects. The
period ofa planct in deep exaltation, occupying the 12th house from
Lagna, differs trom the period of the same should it be in the Llth
or 10th. The period of a Neechazraha (debilitated planet) in evil
conjunction differs from the Dasa of the same in geod combinations.
While the general condition of the man may remain stationary, as
a king, a general, a judge or a merchant, he may be subjected to
various temporary misfortunes without losing his general position
and status in life. The author,in order to meet all these contin-
gencies,draws the attention of his readers and asks them to bear these
sources of strength and weakness of the planets in mind in ven-
turing future predictions. A planet in exaltation gives a general
value to the horoscope but if his favourable period comes he gives
it a sudden elevation or perceptible change for better. Ifa friend-
lv planet’s sub-period comes, and the general lord is good, he gives
much prosperity. If a debilitated planet rules and another power-
less planet intervenes as his sub-lord, the man will be plunged into
difficulties and disgrace. A planct in an unfriendly house gives
greater irritation to the person if he is evil and less if he is good.
Planets in Moolathrikonas (see p. 86) are favourable. Planets
in friendly houses give many friends and influence thereby. Men
arcever changing in thcir color, behaviour, passions, tastes, circum-
stances, prosperity and religiousness. Their successes and failures
are also often very remarkable. Failing utterly. in one calling,
some take to others and succeed beyond their most sanguine expec-
tations. Failing in some places men succeed in’ other localities.
Failing with one class or nation they succeed with others. They
change their tastes, their food, their countries, their wives, their

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 30] =====
CHANGES DUE to PuaneTaRy Psrrops. 163

religion, their morals, their language and their character as do the
rays of the ever inconstant Moon. This stanza, if properly
understcod, with reference to the details given in Chapter, I.
enables an astrologer to predict the future of men and the changes
they are likely to meet with great accuracy and precision. ‘The
author first deals with the influences of planets fixed at the time
of birth and then with the influences of planets in their periods
and sub-periods. The combinations of planets as they move on
from year to year, month to month, day to day, and minute to
minute, are not detailed here, and it is understood that the reader
will get them from books which sre devoted to that subject
specially. The author brings another point to prominence which
ought not to be omitted in predicting results. Not only the
strength of the planets in the Rasee has to be taken, but also
the sources of the strength of the lords of the Navainsas which
are occupied by those planets. Take an example. If Moon is in
Taurus, he is exalted and if he chances to be the lord of the
fifth house he becomes extremely good when he is placed in the
quadrants or in 3rd, 10th and Lith honses. But he may be found
to occupy an evil Navamsa like jthat of Capricorn or Aquarius.
Then his influence will be considerably modified by the lord of
the Navamsa he occupies, viz., Satum. Not only should the pla-
nets be strung and auspicious but also the lords of the Navamsas
they occupy. The six sources of strength to the planets are
well explained in the first Chapter. (See notes on pp. 96 to 103.)

101

तद्धविशस्याधिशचुप्रहोवा योनालेरोविदुदून्यक्षयुक्तः ।
तत्तप्ाकेमू्िवित्तादिकानां नाशंबयद वनित्मान्निकश्च ॥ ६६३ ॥

Stanza 163.

In horoscopy or hovary (prasna-question) the planets qive such
results in their periods and sub-periods as ure to Le aseribed to them
by their occupation, their ownership, their aspects, their conjunction,
the influences of the zudiacal signs they occupy when they have no
bindus there, the influences of the aspects of the planets modified by the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 31] =====
162 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANI,

will be the number-of years, months, days, &c., which have been
given by the most powerful of these three in Gruhadatta Pindayur-
daya or the extent of life given by it to the foetus in the womb.
The next Dasa will be that of the planet who is strongest in the
quadrants. After givine Dasas to all the planets in the quadrants
take the planets in the houses next to quadrants and after
them those which are in lpoklibas or next to them. (See p 59).
In Jaimini Sutras the Dasas are differentiv given, and in Kala-
chakra Vakyas periods are ascribed in a different method. Any
one of these, if properly understood, will be sufficient and will be
found quite correct. Thus the influence of the periods and sub-
periods are very important in moulding man’s prospects. The
period ofa planet in deep exaltation, occupying the 12th house from
Lagna, differs from the period of the same should it be in the 11th
or 10th. The period of a Neechayraha-(debilituted planet) in evil
conjunction differs from the Dasa of the same in good combinations.
While the general condition of the man may remain stationary, as
a king, a general, a judge or a merchant, he may be subjected to
various temporary misfortunes without losing his general position
and status in life. The author, in order to meet all these contin-
gencies,draws the attention of his readers and asks them to boar these
sources of strength and weakness of the planets in mind in ven-
turing future predictions. A planet in exaltation givesa general
value to the horoscope but if his favourable period comes he gives
it a sudden elevation or perceptible change for better. Ifa friend-
lv planet’s sub-period comes, and the general lord is good, he gives
much prosperity. If a debilitated planet rules and another power-
less planet intervenes as his sub-lord, the man will be plunged into
difficulties and aisgrace. A planet in an unfriendly house gives
ereater irritation to the person if he is evil and less if he is good.
Planets in Moolathrikonas (see p. 86) are favourable. Planets
in friendly houses give many friends and influence thereby. Men
are ever changing in their color, behaviour, passions, tastes, cireum-
stances, prosperity and religiousness. Their successes and failures
are also often very remarkable. Failing utterly, in one calling,
some take to others and succeed beyond their most sanguine expec-
tations. Failing in some places men succeed in’ other localities.
Failing with one class or nation they succeed with others. They
change their tastes, their food, their countries, their wives, their

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 32] =====
CHANGES pur to PuaneTaRY Psrrops. 163

religion, their morals, their language and their character as do the
rays of the ever inconstant Moon. This stanza, if properly
understcod, with reference to the details given in Chapter, I.
enables an astrologer to predict the future of men and the changes
they are likely to meet with great accuracy and precision. ‘The
author first deals with the influences of plancts fixed at the time
of birth and then with the influences of planets in their periods
and sub-periods. The combinations of planets as they move on
from year to year, mouth to month, day to day, and minute to
minute, are not detailed here, and it is understood that the reader
will get them from books which are devoted to that subject
specially. The author brings another point to prominence which
ought not to be omitted in predicting results. Not only the
strength of the planets in the Rasec has to be taken, but also
the sources of the strength of the lords of the Navamsas which
are occupied by those planets. Take an example. If Moon is in
Taurus, he is exalted and if he chances to be the lord of the
fifth house he becomes extremely good when he is placed in the
quadrants or in 3rd, 10th and iithhouses. But he may be found
to occupy an evil Navamsa like jthat of Capricorn or Aquarius.
Then his influence will be considerably modified by the lord of
the Navamsa he occupies, viz., Saturn. Not only should the pla-
nets be strong and auspicious but also the lords of the Navamsas
they occupy. The six sources of strength to the planets are, ~
well explained in the first Chapter. (See notes on pp- 96 to 108.)

10

तद्धविशस्याधिकशनुमदोषा योनाखेगोविदुशुन्यक्षयुक्तः ।
तत्तत्पाकेमूत्तिषिन्तादि कानां agers १६२३ ॥

Sranza 163.

In horoscopy or horary (prasna-question) the planets give such
results in their periods and sub-periods as ure to be ascribed to them
by their occupation, their ownership, their aspects, their conjunction,
the influences of the zudiacal signs they occupy when they have no
bindus there, the influences of the aspects of the planets modified by the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 33] =====
164 Sar waRTHACHINTAMANI.

zodiacal siqus they are in their own peculiarities and the peculiarities
of the Rusees.
NOTES.

The stanza is an important one. As the above stanza so also
this stanza, leads to important facts a careful knowledge of which
is indispensable in ascribing pah/uim (results) to the periods and
sub-periods of plauets. At the time of birth or question planets
calculated, will be found to occupy certain Bhavas or significations.
There are 12 houses and their significations have already been
detailed in Chapter I. (rude p. 53). They will be shown later on in
greater detail. All planets own certain houses at the time of birth
or question. This is indispensable. The lord of birth may be in
the 12th aspected by the lord of the 5th in the 6th. The planets
are influenced by their own characteristics, by those with whom
they join, by the signs ther occupy, by the planets they are as-
pected, and by the houses they own. Thus lords of the 8rd, 6th
and Lith houses, prima facie produce evil, but they may be benefici-
ally joined, aspected, exalted or occupied, when they change their
evil nature and become producers of favourable results. The
Navamsa influences are not to be forgotten. The influences of
signs are also important factors. Mercury in Scorpio is bad. The
Sun in Capricornus and .\quarivs is bad and so forth. The
author of Sarwarthachintamani seems to make no distinction be-
tween the time of birth and that of question, although other
writers on astrology have kept them as far as possible separately
und treated them differently.

In Chappana and Lampaka, two eminent works on horary
astrology (treating on questions asked) the imatter is treated quite
distinctly and elaborately. ‘I'he astaka verga process is not men-
tioned here where certain houses have only a few Bindus (ciphers)
or none at all, their influences have also to be considered in judging
of planetary power.

 

30:

 

येखेटास्तेषुवाच्यं प्रबल्खगत्रलं पाककालेतुधैरत ।
दवावेशेवाभवनगुणमुक्तुल्ययोगस्यवापि ।
लेटिस्याहु:फल्मपिदगीशस्ययोनि प्रभेदे ।

योग्यंवाच्यं TATA. PTH ATAU A. . . १६४

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 34] =====
UNFAVOURABLE INFLUENCES. 165

Stanza 164.

At the time of birth or question, the results uf those planets who
are most powerfully aspected or combined in their respective Bhavas
(significations) coupled with the influences of the Zudiaval signs,
which are occupied by them will have to be predicted in their periods
and sub-periods, The injluecnres of the plaucts, the Iusees they
occupy, the siqnifications of those planets and Rasees, the iniluences
of aspecting and combining planets, with those of houses they occupy,
have all to be taken into consideration in predicting results,

NOTES,

Venkatasa has already told his readers to get all other infor-
mation which is not found in his book, from competent works cn
astrology. Astakwourga has not been treated by himin this book. I
refer the readers to Brihatjatka Ch. IX. where the valuable pro-
cesses and examples about Astakavarga are given. ‘There is also a
separate book devoted to this and it may be consulted with great ad-
vantage. The book is:called Astula Varga Bindusodhana. Certain
positions of planets are indicated at the time of birth as favourable,
and these are denoted by putting in a bindu or zero, and others
which are unfavourable as regards positions at the time of birth are
shown by Jekhas or simple marks or dots. If any sign has no
Bindus and a planet occupies it, the signitications denoted by that
sign will be destroyed. A man is born in ‘'aurus. here is
Saturn in the 3rd house, which gets no zeroes in the Astakavarga
processes. .During the time of Saturn cither as principal or as
sub-dasanatha the Bhava, viz. brothers, courage &c., indicated by
the 8rd house will be destroyed or will be afflicted. A debilitated
planet occupies the 10th house which signifies meaus of livelihood,
reputation, politieal credit &e. The native will suffer dismissal,
disgrace or prosecution-or loss of reputation during the period of
that-planet or its sub-period. If the period of a planet in an un-
friendly house comes up and he represents the 7th signification
‘then death or danger to wife or disturbance to domestic happiness
amust ibe predicted. These stanzas ought to be very carefully
studied. .Lwery planet or sign Must and will represent some
Bhave or-other and if-that planet happens to be debilitated or is

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 35] =====
166 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

found in an unfriendly house or has evil aspects or otherwise be-
comes powerless, the Bhava so indicated suffers when the period
or sub-period of that planet comes. The intensity of the danger
and its duration will depend upon the evil nature of the planet
and other sources of weakness it has. It will be seen how diffi-
cult astrology is and what an amount of intelligence and study
are required to make successful predictions. The cheap few-
penny astrologers, with a few stanzas in their heads, cannot
certainly be expected to do even an apology for justice to this science
and those intelligent people who consult them with a view to cheap
payments, ought certainly to realize their own duties to the sublime
science from which they wish to precure the best information pos-
sible. ‘he hateful idea of making grand sciences very easy is to
be doubly deplored. There is no royal road to learning and when
such easy methods are promulgated they produce simply disastrous
results from the superficiality of its treatment. How can any diffi-
cult science be mastered and made practical without a lifelong de-
votion ? Even then the e¢ert knows that he has much to learn.
Venkates does not encourage such easy going rogues who would
like to pose as astrologers by a superficial knowledge. He insists
upon a fair knowledge of the elementary portion before the stu-
dent could make any attempt at predictions. The whole lot of
details must be gone through aud that thoroughly well, if not he
does not guarantee the results described by him and the ancient
Mahurishis (sages). 1L-beg to draw the readers’ attention to these
pertinent remarks of the author, supplemented by my own.

When so many preliminaries are required to be studied and
remembered it can easily be seen that the one anna and the two
anna astrologers will ouly give in return an equivalent intellectual
value for the amounts paid to them by the consultors. For each
planet there are about 30 or 40 sources of strength to be considered
in the commencement, The Zodiacal signs are equally affected.
The strength of constellations have to be marked, The periods
and sub-periods have to be bronght down to the minutest division
possible and the different combinations must be consulted. All
objects in nature are governed by these planets and they ‘have to
be ascribed. or identified under their respective jurisdictions. ‘Then
there are the mathematical calculations to get at: the correct

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 36] =====
CAUSES FOR FAILURE OF Prepictions. 167

positions of planets, and to fix the different Bhavas at the time of
birth or question. The Astakaverga and other processes recom-
mended in the standard works on astrology lave to be learut and
worked out. The astrologer becomes only then duly qualified to
enter into the regions of prediction and make his way there as
best as he can, according to the strength of his general education
qualified by the special study, and backed up by a splendid memory
and the more splendid genius.

These are not the kind of astrologers whom we daily
meet in the market. ‘Those who consult have no reason what-
ever to complain against the quacks, for they pay them badly, and
like quacks, expect them towork well and honestly for the trifi-
ing payment. ‘hey scatter dirt and hope to gather gems into the
bargain and if they are disappointed the fault is more with them-
selves than with the quacks whoare consulted. If society only con-
demns quacks and rogues and neglects them as they deserve to be, they
will gradually drop down and disappear in course of time, but this
will never be done. The best way to put down prostitution is to neg-
lect women of evil repute. But society as a whole has never done
it and can never do it, and prostitution prevails to an awful
extent simply by the encouragement given to it by suciety. 11
quacks and imposters are treated with contempt, they will never
flourish. but this can only be done when socicty is nut what it is
now. ‘Lhis will be paying a high morai complement to society.
As long as a large percentage of the individuals forming a society,
are themselves imposters and cheats in other fields of work than
astrology, they cannot but tolerate their brethren in this, by the
sheer force of mutual professional sympathy. One rogue goes to
another to overreach him. The latter knows the object of the
former’s visit, and each conscious of his own skill in imposiure tries
to do business with the other as an honest man. The other equally
clever only returns his complement if he can. There are many
patrons who encourage quacks in the field of astrology, and make
much of them for not what they know or can prophesy, but for pur-
poses for which they may be used to the consultor’s advantage.
The astrological rogues, well posted in the work of imposture of
the latest pattern, return calmly their complement when their turn
comes and pay them in their own coin. Thus both parties—those

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 37] =====
168 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

who consult and those who are consulted—are largely to blame,
and these are indispensable to the existence of society as it is and
as it will be for ages to come. Morality and honesty will remove
alot of these difficulties, but they cannot be purchased unfortu-
nately in the world’s market. Wenkatasa in the commencement of
the 2nd chapter shows the importance of these general principles
in the astrological sciences which have to guide the astrologer in
the art of his predictions. Good planets in good Bhavas, with
good combinations and good aspects, in good houses produce
favourable results while evil planets in evil Bhavas with evil con-
junctions and evil aspects produce much misery and unhappiness.
Planets in combust are called Asfa and they are said to yield very
unfavourable results. Those planets which are with the Sun in
any sign in close proximity with his disk get powerless, and are
called Vikala or without light or rays. The moon affords a splen-
did example of this on the new Moon day. We hardly see the
Moon and he is perfectly powerless and without rays when he is in
close proximity with the solar disk. Rahu and Kethu have no
coudiest and on the other hand the presence of those planets with
the Sun will considerably impair the Sun’s capacity to influence
as he is said to be eclipsed by them. All the other planets have
this state of combustion when they are close to the Sun.

 

 

Or

मेदमाद्यनुखरेशरधपार तनवांापतयोथयेग्रदाः ।
तेषुदु॑ख्दशा मृतिप्रदा कष्टमे चरतिसूर्थनंदने ॥ १६९
STANZA THD,

Vhe lords of the Nacamsus occupied by Sani, Mandi, Rahu,
Ciuliku, aud the lord uf the Sth, are generally the Maraku planets to
the native and kill him when Sani is moving in the Sth house and
when the worst period of any one of the above planets is passing at
the tiie. |

NOTES,
Venkatasa now gives hints as to who is likely to kill a native,
Tn the Rasi diagram Saturn, Mandi, Rahu, Gulika, and the lord of
the 8th from Lagna are to be fixed, and then their positions in
the Navamsa have to be ascertained by pure mathematical calewlas

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 38] =====
Gocuara on Lire. 169

tions. (Vide pp 50—69.) The lords of the Navamsas where the
above named planets are situated, are found to be powerful in in-
flicting death when Saturn is moving in the Sth, The author is’
not clear about the last expression, but he presumes a general
knowledge in the student. Gochara or the movements of the
planets every day with reference to the position of the Moon at the
time of birth has much good and evil influence on the person as
the planets are favourably or unfavourably combined at any given
time. The eighth house froin the Moon represents the length of
life. If Saturn is moving there, any one of the unfavourable
periods of the lords of the Navamsas cecupied by Sani, Rahn,
Mandi, Gulika or the lord of the eighth from Lagna intervenes,
then death may be reascnably expected. One or two illustrations
will clear this most important point.
Take a horoscope for illustration.

me ee `:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

([1{1{11 रिरि
| Moon | Birth | Saturn 11, = A
Rahu ‘Gulika) Mandi | Gulika
| STITT TN) TTT
cI १ |
| Sun - |
iMercu ५ | |
: it N
(आ ५१५१५ ॥ | | Naydmsa. |
| 1 |
| | | |
81191 | | t (| |
Mars ' Mer- | Kethu) venus
/ Venus | Kethu | , cury {Mandi । 11 Moon |

 

 

 

 

 

The person was born on a Tuesday and Mandi begins to influ-
ence him after 17 ghatikas and is placel in Gemini. As per Stanza
Saturn, Mandi, Gulika, Rahu and the lord of the 8th must first be
noticed. The lord of the 8th is Jupiter, All these are found in
the Navamsas thus— Jupiter and Gulika in Arics, Rahu in ‘Taurus,
Saturn in Libra and Mandi in Scorpio. The lords of Navamsag
oocupied by them are Mars, Venus, Venus and Mars respectively, .

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 39] =====
168 SARWARTHAGHINTAMANI.

who consult and those who are consulted—are largely to blame,
and these are indispensable to the existence of society as it is and
as it will be for ages to come. Morality and honesty will remove
alot of these ditficultics, but they cannot be purchased unfortu-
nately in the world’s market. Venkatasa in the commencement of
the 2nd chapter shows the importance of these general principles
in the astrological sciences which have to guide the astrologer in
the art of his predictions. Good planets in good Bhavas, with
good combinations and good aspects, in good houses produce
favourable results while evil planets in evil Bhavas with evil con-
junctions and evil aspects produee much misery and unhappiness.
Planets in combust ave called Asta and they are said to yield very
unfavourable results. ‘Those planets which are with the Sun in
any sign in close proximity with his disk get powerless, and are
called Vikala or without light or rays. The moon affords a splen-
did example of this on the new Moon day. We hardly see the
Moon and he is perfectly powerless and without rays when he is in
close proximity with the svlar disk, Rahu and Kethu have no
rombust and on the other hand the presence of those planets with
the Sun will considerably impair the Sun’s capacity to influence
as he is said to be eclipsed by them. All the other planets have
this state of combustion when they are close to the Sun.

 

 

2G
मेद भांद्यगुखरेशरध पार तन्वां रापतयोथयेग्रहाः ।
तेषुदुतर॑ल्द शा मृतिप्रदा कष्टमेचरतिसूर्ैनंदने ॥ १६५९

STANZA 102,

The lords af the Nacamsas occupied by Sani, Mandi, Rahu,
(fulika, and the lord of the Sth, are generally the Maraku planets to
the native and kill him when Sani is moving in the 8th house and
when the worst period of any one of the above planets is passing at
the time.

NOTES,

Venkatasa now gives hints as to who is likely to kill a native,
In the Rasi diagram Saturn, Mandi, Rahu, Gulika, and the lord of
the 8th from Lagna are to be fixed, and then their positions in
the Navamsa have to be ascertained by pure mathematical caloula-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 40] =====
Gocwara on Lire. 169

tions. (Vide pp 50—69.) The lords of the Navamsas where the
above named planets are situated, are found to be powerful in ins
flicting death when Saturn is moving in the 8th. The author is’
not clear about the last expression, but he presumes a general
knowledge in the student. Gochara or the movements of the
planets every day with reference to the position of the Moon at the
time of birth has much good and evil influence on the person as

the planets are favourably or unfavourably combined at any given

time. The eighth house from the Moon represents the length of

life. If Saturn is moving there, any one of the unfavourable

periods of the lords of the Navamsas cccupied by Sani, Rahu,

Mandi, Gulika or the lord of the eighth from Lagna intervenes,

then death may be reasonably expected. One or two illustrations

will clear this most important point.

Take a horoscope for illustration.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| ॥॥॥॥ B ||| 77 | |
Moon Birth} Saturn |

! Rahu Gulika| Mandi | ih Rahu |

[रा mu AA

i Sun | i

iMercur | | | |

hi tor | | | | Naydmsa

| |

¦ | | | | |

| |

||| | ME MILL | Kethu yess
। ars | Mer ethu: Venus

Venus. | |Kethu | cury. (Mandi! gies, Moon

 

[हि

* --~ ee.

 

 

 

The person was born on a Tuesday and Mandi begins to influ-
ence him after 17 ghatikas and is placed in Gemini. As per Stanza
Saturn, Mandi, Gulika, Rahu and the lord of the 8th must first be
noticed. The lord of the 8th is Jupiter. All these are found in>
the Navamsas thus— Jupiter and Gulika in Arics, Rahu in Taurus,
Saturn in Libra and Mandi in Scorpio. The lords of Navamsas
नी by them are Mars, Venus, Venus and Mars respectively. -.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 41] =====
420, SaRWARTHACHINTAMANI.

When Saturn is moving in Scorpio as per Gcchara, the death of the
party may be predicted in the subpericd of the most powerless of the
above planets. Of the two planets, Mars and Venus it has to be
determined who is the weakest, and then death must be ascribed to
him. Venus is the lord of the birth ,a friend of Saturn and stays
in the eighth house, in opposition to him, In the Amsa, Venus-has
gained strength by being in his own house, and in company with
Saturn who is exalted there. Mars on the other hand is the lord
of the ¢th and 12th houses, oceupies Libra an unfriendly house,
and isin the Amsa, with Venus, Saturn and the Sun in Libra.
The Sun is in debilitation and Mars is in an unfriendly house.
Mars therefore is weaker in comparison with Venus. When Sa-
turn is moving in Scorpio and Mars becomes the lord or sub-lord
of the period, death may be predicted. All these points involve a
series of mathematical calculations without which the work of the
astrologer becomes more or less a guess work, and quite a broken
reed, totrust to, for making certain predictions about future events.

Sn

 

घनाधपः पापलगोयदिस्या च्छन्यास्मोरमीद दिनेश्वराणां ।
अतदेदायां धननाशमाहुः परापान्विते तद्धवनेतथैव ॥
21435४4 166.

Ir the lurd of the 2nd house is an evil planet, Uf an evil planet
ocen pies the 2ad house, and if the lord of the Ind is in conj unction
with an evil planet, loss of wealth wust be predicted in the sub-
periods of Suni, Kuju, Ltahu and Racis

NOTES.

Venkatasa having given hints as to the results about the
health, life and general prospects by the strength or weakness of
planets, now begins to enumerate the combinations which cause
loss to property and the times when such losses of wealth may be
expected. Evil planets are Saturn, Mars, Sun and Rahu. Weak
Moon and badly associated Mercury are not named by him here. ag.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 42] =====
Trmgs For Loss of Money. v1

evil, although he was stated so in Stauza 76 (Vide p. 70), The
first condition is that lord of the 2nd house, signifying wealth,
must be an evil planet, there must be a malefic in the second and
the lord of the 2nd must be in evil conjunciion. Then the sub-
periods of Saturn, Mars, Rahu and the Sun, will cause loss to ihe
wealth of the person. Ia what periods these sub-periods will cause
ruin or loss is not clearly mentioned. But we can easily see that
these sub-periods during the Dasss of the lord cf the 2nd house
who is evil, the evil planet which occu ics the second house and
the malefie with whom the lord of the 2nd combines, are the
Anthar dasas, when ihe person will be subjected to losses in
property. The Dasas and Bhuktis of evil planets are unfavour-
able and it is very uatural to expect loss of money when any one
of them has jurisdiction over the house of wealth. Losses are
mentioned but what are the causes by which these losses are to be
expected are not detailed. I will try to explain them’ later on.
Ee
धनान्वितः पापलगस्तदीशः स्यच्वेदश्ायां क्षिति षाटकोपात्‌ ।
मानाथनाशोनिगल्छं नराणां स्यानच्चयतिः स्वेष्टननेर्विगेधः

Sranza 16

Tf the lord of the 2ad isan eril planct und veeupies that house
there will be loss of wealth. public disqrace, fines and penalties through
the displeasure of government, confiscation of property, imprison-
ment, separation from his country or banishment and hatred of the
relations, during his period

NOTES.

If the lord of the 2nd is in that house, and happens to be evil,
he produces all the above miseries during his period. Suppose he
is an evil pianet and owns the 2nd house, and occupies it without
favourable aspects and if he is in exaltation can all the above mises
ries be safely predicted about the man? The author has already
told his readers that when evil planets are well aspected or
in good houses, or in exaltations, they greatly modify their.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 43] =====
172 SARWABTHACHINTAMANT.

evil results and produce even beneficial results. If the same lord
is debilitated, and aspected by evil planets, the’ person ‘suffers
greatly and will be thoroughly ruined. The degree of intensity
of weakness or strength of the planet must be ascertained by
mathematical calculations, and where evil is in. abundance;
the suffering and ruination will be large, but where good is found
among the evil planets in the shape of strength by aspect, exalta-
tion, occupation of good Vargas and so forth, evil must be predict-
ed, but ina considerably mitigated form, or the person gets into
troubles and gets out of them again with honor.

—~ +e ——
पापग्रह्मणा मपहारकारे पापग्रदाणां विद शचाविपाके ।
 भूम्यथेमनात्मनपोदराणां नाशंसमायाति इुरभैनदोषः ॥
Sranza 168,
During the above nctined eeil planetary perials, their sub-peviods
and their still minor Uivisions, the person loses lands, riches, reputa-
tion, children and brothers. Good planets do not produce such

unfavourable results,
NOTES.

This is a continuation of the previous stanza. It is meant
here to show that the periods and sub-periods of evil planets pro-
duce loss of wealth, lands, death of children and brothers, and
bring the man to disgrace and ruin. Good planets, he says, do not
produce such results. Even in their sub-periods, and other divi-
sions, beuefics are more considerate than malefics in producing
evil results. a  —

वित्तङ्मे शोभनलेचवरेशे तत्पाक्रकाङे घनल्यममेति |

. शुभग्रहाणा मपहारकारे तदाभवेहात्मज वागिरसः ॥

Sranza 169. |||

Pf there is a good planet in the 2ud housa, ant the lord of the
2nd is a benefic, then prosperity may be predicted in the Dasa of the
latter as also the pleasure of hearing the tall of his children.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 44] =====
Prospzrovs Times. 173

NOTES -

The mere fact of the lord of the 2nd being a benefice adds
much to wealtl, and if he aeeupies a good position, and auspicious
planets occupy the 2nd,- large wealth and all its appendages will
flow easily and with little exertion on the part of the man. If an
exalted . good planet occupies the 2nd and his Dasa or Bhukti
comes in an equally favourable period or sub-period, the man will
have suiden and unexpected fortunes. ‘To him, everything promi-
ses success, and all institutions would prosper greatly with which
his name is connected and which he starts. This affords a good
sphere for starters of all institutions, societies and speculations,
and they must appoint such men as secretaries and presidents,
as have their lord of the second favourably situated, and who have
good planets in the second houses and who are under the influences
of such periods and sub-periods. The speculations thus started
will attract money, influence, and thrive well. When pegsons,
whose lords of the 2nd and 10th houses ‘are evil, and when those
signs are occupied by evil planets, are selected as secretaries,
managers and presidents, the institutions are sure to suffer and
bring discredit upon their promoters. Men arethoroughly blinded
by prejudice, they spend hundreds or thousands in all preliminary
tomfoolleries, but will not secure the permanency and suceess
of any institution by consulting competent astrologers and taking

their advice beforehand.
uring the sub-period of the lord of the 2nd, when he is good
or during the sub-period of the planet who is good and who oceu-
pics the 2nd house the person'will have the pleasure of hearing
his children talk. This means that he will have children and
they will prosper well.
i Ee ——
wees fay धिन पापान्तिते पापविय्चराणां ।
अतदैशाया TAMAS TACT YAH Uh

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 45] =====
176 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANT.

Stanza 173.

Daring the period of the lord af the 4th house in the sub-periods
of evil, combust or debilitated planets, the person will be compelled to
leave his country and there will be yreat loss amoiy his relations.

From the third, Venkatesa takes the ‘reader tothe 4th sign.
All these Bhavas are to be counted from the Lagna or birth,
Fourth means, the fourth from the Lagna, As many are making
mistakes about these preliminary facts I have to call their attention
to these facts. If Aries is Lagna, it counts as one. ‘The second is
Taurus, the third is Gemini, the fourth is Cancer, and the fifth is
Leo and soon, The fourth house signifies carriages, education,
mother, happiness, relations, morality, lands, horses and houses ;
all these have to be consulted for their prosperity or adversity
with reference to this house, its lord, the planets who occupy it
and those which aspect as well as those who are Karakas (lords)
for the various events. Fourth represents mother and its lord may
be any one of the planets. The Karaka or lo-d of mother is Chandra.
Fourth represents education, and its lord may be Kuja. But the
Karaka (lord) for it is Guru and his strength las to be consulted
in addition to the lord of the fourth. Thus if the lord of the 4th is
a benefic and is well situated, it cannot be said that all those events
which are signified by it will be eqaully prosperous. If the Iord
of the 4th and Moon are good, mother will be happy and long-
lived. I£ the lord of 4th and Jupiter, are good, the person will
have good education. If he and Mercury are favourable, there will
have good education and high intelligence. Ifthe lord of the 4th
is a benefic, those events indicated by that house will be successful. .
A powerful Sukra with a beneficient aspect and the exaltation of
the lord of the 4th will be most desirable and will add much ‘to-
the worldly comforts of the man. Later on this house will be
dealt with at greater length. —
0 ~ ¬ aren

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 46] =====
~

Ll
Menran axb Boniny Distases. 1

नुद्धिभमं क्रस्सितभोजनंच पापग्रहाणां सुतमेशकाले |
Haat vate PATA तथाफतु ॥
+, 114. ।
(17१11111 the period of the
lord af the 5th house, who is ecil, the perso becomes deranged or
insnne avd will hace dirty and unseasonihle wmeals. Lf the lord of

the 5th is a benejie, these unfacourable vesults ought not to be predicted.

NOTES.

The fifth house represents intelligence and children. And
the author is summarising the results shortly with a view to give
« general idea of what may be expected during the period of the
lord of the 5th when evil and the sub periods of the evil planets
come in.

~

राजाभ्नि चोरैव्य॑सनं त्रणेश दशाविपाकेतु दुभेतराणां ।
अतधश्षायामतिकष्टमेति प्रमेहगुल्मक्षय पिनकातैः ॥
Sranza 175.

Lf the ecil planets bring their sub-periols duriay the period of the
lord of the 6th, when he is evil, they yice losses fram litigation, tines,
thiervs, fire und enemies amd they also yroduee junsdire, sth,
renereal compliiuits, consumption, enlargement of spleen or liver 3

and those sab-periods will be productive of much mixer y.

NOTES.

Sixth house represents debt, diseases and enemies Men
cannot be more miserable than when they have these three sources
of misfortunes. Any one of them will be enough to kill ordinary
men. Three of them will be too much for even men with wonder-
ful patience. To the list of misfortunes, the author has enumerat-.
ed, he should have added the dun of the creditors. Litigation in-
cludes all such sort of things. Jn all astrology, the most useful

chapters are those which deal with misfortunes, miseries and
23

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 47] =====
178 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI

deaths. Men in all ages have tried to overcome these by kuow-
ing them beforehand, and their successes have varied with the
physical conditions they were surrounded, and the amount of
intelligence, patience and devotion they possessed in the pursuit of
knowledge which analysed these sources of misery, aud which
enabled them to find out counter influences to modif y or remove
them altogether. Hindus pretended great knowledge in these
maiters and it is for the students to find out how far their preten-
sions are justifiable. If a man is surrounded by enemies his life
hecomes miserable and uncertain. [f he has disease, he suffers
much and gets disgusted, if he has debts, the peace of mind goes
away and often he becomes unprincipled to deceive his creditors.
Sixth house, therefore, becomes a very important one and tho
more men study about it, the better it will be for them, with a view
to find means to overcome the evils which may be indicated by the
planetary periods and sub-neriods. There are differences in the
doctrines of astrology on this point. Some authors call good
planets in the sixth house as producers of evil results, while others
say that evil planets in the sixth house produce evil. Regarding
these important differences in astrology I would draw the attention
of my readers to the valuable articles [ have contributed in the
pages of my Astrological Magazine in Vols. If, (1, IV, Vand Ve.

दण्शिपापग्रहदायकाङे चियां विरोधं मणंचतस्याः ।
विदे शयान॑चपुरीषमृत्र छृष्रुभवेध्मूपतति कोपमत ॥

Sranza 176.

If the period of the lord of the 7th awho is evil, comes, the person
will have quarrels with fonurles, and his wife may die. He will ineur
the displeasure of government, aud will be separated from his dear
country. He will be subjected to complaints of the seanual organs and
anus

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 48] =====
1411140 Muiserins. 179

NOTES.

Seventh is the house of marriage, passions, sexual happiness,
and wife. When the lord of that house is evil and his Dasa
comes, the person will be banished from his country, will quarrel
with his wife and she will die. ‘The displeasure of the ruling
authorities is a source of unhappiness to him. Venereal complaints
in the sexnal organs and in anus will also trouble him much. The
author here simply refers to the period of the evil lord of the 7th
without referring to sub-periods of evil planets. But that is to be
implied. ia Dasa extends for 20 years, there will be good and
evil planets as Antardasanathas or lords of sub-periods. It is only
the evil lords of the sub-periods who produce the above-named
miseries- Good planets do not vive evil results.

Marriage can make a “ heaven of hell and a hell of heaven.”
A good wife, obedient, loving and chaste, will make a man enjoy
heavenly bliss although he may be surrounded by great miseries
and poverty. Buta quarrelsome, unfaithful and impertinent wife
can make a man extremely miserable, although he may be rolling
in wealth, and may have a good social positions The seventh
house represents wife as well as sexual organs,and the complaints
therefrom. Evil plancts make him adulterous and give him as the
result’of immorality, continuous future sexual diseases.

रप्रेशदाये फणिनाघमीम श्ैश्वराणा WHS |
आयुथेशोषित्तमिनाशनं च दारात्मबेध्विष्ट सहोदराणां ॥

Sranza 177,
During the period of the lord of the 8th when evil the sube

periods of Raku, Mars and Saturn give loss of wealth, reputation,
life, wife, relations, friends and brothers.
NOTES.
Venkatasa names only Rahu, Kuja and Sani as evil planets
here, and says that during their sub-periods they produce undesir-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 49] =====
1४0 DAKW ARTHACHINTAMANI,

able results. The lord of the Sth is generally bad aud if he
happens to be an evil planet he will be much more so. By evil,
T believe it is to be understvod as the planet being in evil houses,
with evil aspects and conjunctions or owning evil signs.

स्यानच्युति बेदुत्रिोषताच विदेशगनं पदजैविरोधः |
भवेच्छुभेशस्य दशाविपाके शनैश्वएराहि दिनाधिपानां ॥
Sranzi 178.

Lf the lord uf’ the 9th és evil, duving his period and the sub
pertuds of Rahu, Sani, Aja and Revi, there will be much misery
fron wdiaderinys baa Joreiyn couitry, hatred of relations, quarrels
with eothers cued separation frou home.

NOTES.

In the above stanza Ravi has beea omitted as an evil planet
while here aud elsewhere he is included in the list of evil planets,
9th represents father, religiousness. Lhapus and wealth in a
general way. Generally the lord of the 9th is good by ownership
us it isa Thrikona, and confers strength on its lord. But when he
is evil, debilitated, in unfriendly huvuses with evil aspects and
conjunctions, he cannot certuinly be expected to produce good.
During the Dasa of the lord of the 9th when evil and the: sub-
periods of Sani, Kuja, Rahu, and Ravi the person Sufters from hatred
of relations, separation from home, and quarrels with brothers.
If these lords of sub-periods are good by exaltation and aspects
then they will not do much evil. |

कारागरहपरा्ि मनकदुःलं दुस्सम शोकानल्दग्धदेनः |
कमेन्वरस्यांतरमुक्तिकार पापग्रहाणा मपकोिमेति ॥
Stanza 179.

Lhe sub-periods of evil planets during the period of the lord of
the 10th when evil, will produce imprisonment, many kinds of mise«

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 50] =====
Pupnic Disurack axp Daxuen: 181

rlesy horrible aud disturbing dreams, emaridtion in the holy by cavi-
ous linds of misfortunes and ecil reputations
NOTES.

Venkatasa has not here said who are evi! planets. In Stanza
166, he stated who are evil planets and when the subsequent
stanzas omit to mention them, it is understood that the student
refers to them. {Vide notes to Stanza 166). They are Rahu, Kuja,
Sani and Ravi, weak Moon and bad Mercury.

Tenth is the house of reputation, means of livelihood, veneral
rise and influence or rajayoga titles, political success and position.
Some have great influence with the fovernment, some command
respect among their relations, some are obeyed by their elass peo-
ple, Some secure universal respect. All these states of influences
and their thousand different grades are due to the strength of the
lord of the 10th and those who occupy and aspect it. Man always
suffers public disgrace if evil planets aspect or occupy the 10th
when its lord is powerless, when debilitated planets oceupy it, and
when there is evil conjunction there. This is a very important
house, and deserves every care at the hands of the student. If
there are exalted planets in the tenth house and they are not
debilitated in the Navainsas the person vets sudden elevations. If
exalted planet occupies a debilitated insu the person gets promo-
tion and gets also degradation. All these Bhavas or houses are
carefully explained in the subsequent chapters.

दशाविपाके व्वघल्भपस्य भूक्तबंतरे द्रव्यविनाशनंच ।

क्व +

VARA Tat Hasse क्षितिपालकोपात्‌ ॥
~

Sranza 180.

Ff the sub-periods of Ravi, Kuja, Rah and Suni intervene in
the period of the evil lord of the 11th house, the person suffers losses
through the displeasure of the ruling authorities, disturbance to his
legitimate work, mental distractions and general misery.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 51] =====
~+

St SARWARTHACHINTAMANT

Sth, and 12th houses from each other they produce banishment, death,
Usmissal, sorrow imputations ayainst honor and general misery
These hare been carefully and cluburately deseribed duviug the periods
and sub- periods al evil plaucts hu the learned Munindrasy

| NCTES.

T have explained in full who are permancat and who are
temporary frievds and all the shades cf differences arising from
these scurees in my uctes te Stanzas 109-116 (ride P,P. 94 & 68).
About the evil influences of planets oecupring 6th, 8th, and 12th
houses see netes on Stauza 145. p. 12-4. If evil planets happen to
be temporary f-ieads the unfavenrable resalts will be ereat ly
modified wid the person will have misfortmues in a mild form.
Those planets who are iu the oth, 8th and i2th houses from each
ether at the time of birth give worry, separation from home and
native country; dismissals, and degradations, false imputations
coustrnt quarrels with mean and low men and general misery.
All thes results, savs Veukatasa,a-e very carefully and elaborately
deseribedl in the Dasa aud Khukti Phalams by the famous Muni n-
dus ov the great Mahavishis. [ce plainly therefore admits his
position as a compiler and takes no credit for auy originality in
his work. Sarwartha Chintamani is an exhaustive compilation
from the mest famous werks on astrology found during the time
ef the learacd anther.

Many people are seusitive and if false or illgrounded imputa-
tions arc levelled agaist them they feel extremely offended and
have great misery. Banishment from a country is unpleasant,
however it might be brought about. All these unfavourable resulis
have to be predicted during the periods of planets who are ill
situated and who have tempcrarr enmity with the lords of the sub-

periods.
: ------- ~ दधद 8

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 52] =====
Birtriutrives ov CHiLbuREen. 185

आपाततस्सं कुवितार्थवाक्यै हक्ताग्रहाणां परिपाकरसंज्ञा |
निषेकलप्रादिनपस्तृतीये राशञौयदाचारवशादुपैति ॥ .

आदानलप्ना दथवात्रिकोनेरवौयदाजन्म वदेनराणां |
आदानल्मरस्सुवमेतुजन्मलमन बदे च्छाच्जविदोवदंति ॥

Stanzas 184 and 185.

The great Munis have framed very short and dificult sutras
indicating extensive meaning in the form of Dusu and Bhubti expla-
nations. When the Sun mores in the third house from the Lugna of
Garbhadhana or inthe Sth aud Othe Jrom it the birth of the child
aust be predicted. The fifth house from the conception Laynu hus
been described by the learned in ustroluyy as thaé which would be the
birth of the future child,

NOTES.

Very important issues have been indicated in these stanzas
and the readers’ attention is drawn to them. Children are indi-
cated by the dth house ina horoscope, ‘his is not a future con-
tingency, but one which already lies prefigured in the horoscope
of any person. A child’s horoscope is taken and its children who
are then nowhere, will be described in plain terms, their number,
seX, prosperity, death and other important particulars appearing
therein. Where are these children of children? and how can an
astrologer know anything of the children of a baby which is per-
haps only a minute old? The Hindu astrology shows its superio-
rity over the Western systems in that it includes the Karma, the
Gnana and the Moksha theories, and rises far above the level of a
material science which can command insight and knowledge only
on a phyiscal basis. All astrological writers are agreed in giving
influences from the very commencement of sexual union and
every one of them traces connection even earlier than that. The
sexual function itself is based upon the influence of planets and

४५

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 53] =====
188 SaRWARTHACHINTANANI.

inhuman murder. But Hindu sciences goa step further and trace
tho prehirth influences even to earlier stages. Conception is the
act at which the prepared seed of the male enters the prepared bed
of the female. If it is admitted that the fetus in the womb of
the female is subjected to good or evil influences during the
carrying months will it not he reasonable to concede that the seed
in the male before its entry into the bed of the female, must
have been subjected to similar influences? The Hindu astrolo-
gical and religious writers have gone even a step further. When
an infant is born, and its horoscope is carefully prepared, it may
be found out by referring to the fifth house what number of
children, of what sex and of what fortune, the baby will have in
future. This may be predicted with reference to the 5th house.
Therefore it is obvious that the future issues of the infant are al-
ready lying prefigured as it were in the infant and being moulded
by invisible forces and that its horoscope indicates both their
number and their sexes. It will be in the hands of the person to
change the law of sex and get males or females as he pleases, pro-
vided he knows beforehand what sort of children he would get,
through competent astrologers and would take proper measures to
change their sex and fortunes before their development is completed
to give the sex formation. European astrologers are entirely
silent on these matters because their astrology gives only the
results of influences at the birth time without teaching the higher
causes which produce these results. If planetary influences are
fixed and there is no pouer in the world to change their effects,
then there is no hope for humanity and despair would be their
goal. It does not appear to be so arranged by the al! merciful
power of the Almighty. Planets indicate previous causes and their
results and there is a ray of the Mighty Power in man called the
Brahma Kala which when, properly devoloped by Yogao Manthra,
or Gnana methods, can be made to overcome and regulate the
planetary influences to the greatest advantage of man. A good

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 54] =====
PeenataL INFLUENCES. 189

astrologer must not only be well versed in astrology but also
in other sciences which have been recommended in the Hindu
method as having a direct bearing upon it. This is a very difficult
and important question and Ihave frequently referred to it in the
columns of the Astrological Magazine. As the planetary influen-
ces of birth are conceatrated, as it were, to a large extent,
comprising the prenatal, paternal, maternal and karmaic results,
it may be generally taken as a safe guide to go on from that period
and base all future predictions upon it. Here a large field for
speculation is opened for those who care to know more about. tha
immediate causes which govern the terrestrial phenomena. All
natural forces are not of the same intensity or potentiality. Some
are apparently weak while others are tremendously strong. The
smaller are naturally governed by the greater. In man the mind
is greater than the physical forces. Mind is governed by some
unknown agent called Self or Ego, This may be called Soul or
jeeva according to the development in an individual. The last
again is governed by still higher forces, uutil we go to the final
Power called the Brahma. Predictions therefore are relative and
pertain to certain Physical levels. There is no fatalism and the
so-called inevitable is an ignorant fiction. The higher is the human
knowledge the greater are the chances of material and moral
advantages to be secured. But for cateful delicate and definite
predictions, not only a thorough knowledge in astrologer is
needed, but also acknowledge in other sciences which have a direct
bearing on the Astrological principles. Medicine as known to the
Western nations has made ordinary progress in the direction of
reproduction and continuation of species. Every sexual act of the
male with the female does not give rise to conception. The
medical man cannot say when a woman concieves. There are
only certain periods when conception can take place. The mar-
riage adaptations, the numerous rituals and the fixing of auspicious
times for sexual union are based upon the theory that when the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 55] =====
188 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANI.

inhuman murder. But Hindu seiences goa step further and trace
the prehirth influences even to earlier stages. Conception is the
act at which the prepared seed of the male enters the prepared bed
of the female. If it is admitted that the fatus in the womb of
the female is subjected to good or evil influences during the
carrying months will it not be reasonable to concede that the seed
in the male before its entry into the bed of the female, must
have been subjected to similar influences? The Hindu astrolo-
gical and religious writers have gone even a step further. When
an infant is born, and its horoscope is carefully prepared, it may
be found out by referring to the fifth house what number of
children, of what sex and of what fortune, the baby will have in
future. This may be predicted with reference to the 5th house.
Therefore it is obvious that the future issues of the infant are al-
ready lying prefigured as it were in the infant and being moulded
by invisible forces and that its horoscope indicates both their
number and their sexes. It will be in the hands of the person to
change the law of sex and get males or females as he pleases, pro-
vided he knows beforehand what sort of children he would get,
through competent astrologers and would take proper measures to
change their sex and fortunes before their development is completed
to give the sex formation. European astrologers are entirely
silent on these matters because their astrology gives only the
results of influences at the birth time without teaching the higher
causes which produce these results. If planetary influences are
fixed and there is no power in the world to change their effects,
then there is no hope for humanity and despair would be their
goal. It does not appear to be so arranged by the all merciful
power of the Almighty. Planets indicate previous causes and their
results and there is a ray of the Mighty Power in man called the
Brahma Kala which when, properly devoloped by Yogao Manthra,
or Gnana methods, can be made to overcome and regulate the
planetary influences to the greatest advantage of man. A good

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 56] =====
Prenatal INFLUENCES. 189

astrologer must not only be well versed in astrology but also
in other sciences which have been recommended in the Hindu
method as having a direct bearing upon it. This is a very difficult
and important question and I have frequently referred to it in the
columns of the Astrological Magavine. As the planetary influon-
ces of birth are conceatrated, as it were, to a large extent,
comprising the prenatal, paternal, maternal and karmaic results,
it may be generally taken as a safe guide to go on from that period
and base all future predictions upon it. Here a large field for
speculation is opened for those who care to know more about th?
immediate causes which govern the terrestrial phenomena. All
natural forces are not of the same intensity or potentiality. Some
are apparently weak while others are tremendously strong. The
smaller are naturally governed by the greater. In man the mind
is greater than the physical forces. Mind is governed by some
unknown agent called Self or Ego. This may be called Soul or
jeeva according to the development in an individual. The last
again is governed by still higher forces, until we go to the final
Power called the Brahma. Predictions therefore are relative and
pertain to certain Physical levels. There is no fatalism and the
so-called inevitable is an ignorant fiction. The higher is the human
knowledge the greater are the chances of material and moral
advantages to be secured. But for cateful delicate and definite
predictions, not only a thorongh knowledge in astrologer is
needed, but also acknowledge in other sciences which have a direct.
bearing on the Astrological principles. Medicine as known to the
Western nations has made ordinary progress in the direction of
reproduction and continuation of species. Every sexual act of the
male with the female does not give rise to conception. The
medical man cannot say when a woman concieves. There are
only certain periods when conception can take place. The mar-
riage adaptations, the numerous rituals and the fixing of auspicious
times for sexual union are based upon the theory that when the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 57] =====
190 SABWARTHACHINTAMANT.

planetary Dasas and Bhukties are favourable these facilitate
conception, when they are unfavourable they produce abortions
or disturbances. he intensity of evil must be met by an equal
intensity of counteracting influences by remedial measures.
Excellent times (/iaqaas) might be fixed by competent astrologers
for the propozation of desired children and success might be
ensured by careful calenlation of the previous forces against the
birth of issues and the good influences which might be directed in
favour of them. If sexual union fails in producing conception the
reason must be sought in astrological causes. Medicine is thoroughly
helpless in this matter. A person-male or female, who has Mars
Saturn or weak Sun with evil combination in the fifth house will
have no children, or will have children who die early, because on
every act of his sexual union with his partner, the influences of
these malefics will be exercised, and they will dry up the
progeny by the unfavourable magnetic currents. But when
benefics are there the seed will be prolifie and the house-hold will
he blessed with children.

---- ^ ----
पुलांशकरवापिनिषेककलि पुंलन्मजाव्यजननविलमात्‌ ।
निषकलभरेशतृतीय्यनाथौरलमस्तिती चेद्यम्टोद्धवस्यात्‌ ॥
तृतीय्यनाथेनयुतेनिषेकलमन श्वरस्तत्सहजेतभैव ।

निषकलतने शशिनेदनोवारव्यात्मजो Tae WITS: I
विडाङ्तेजेनमवदे तदानीं शुभेषित्ेनतथाविदंतत्‌ ।

लर श्वरेकर्मगतेविरमने भोगीद्रयुक्तेसतिपादजातः ॥

रत्र श्वरेराहूयुतेविलम्ने जतिरौवष्ठितसंमवस्यात्‌ ।
केद्रसरौगुच्छिके नयुक्ते लगने रेरेवानिधनेशयुक्ते ॥
कूरपरहाणांचटगाणल्पे जातोररवष्टितसंमवस्पात्‌ ।
लम्नतिभागोडजसपैसौज्ञसनानयुक्तश्वतधात्रिमागः ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 58] =====
Sexes snp PevuLiARrrigs oF ( WiLDREN. 11

Sranzas 197, 188, 189, 190 and 191.

If the Navamsa of conception sign fulls in male sigus or those
oceupied by male planets, male children must be predicted. If other-
wise female children will be born.

If the lords of conception sign und the 8rd froin tty are occu pying
the conception Lagna (Nishaka) then the birth of twins must be pre-
dicted. 187.

If the lords of conception sign aud the 3rd from it are found in
the 3rd house, there will be twins born. If the conception Lagna
is occupied by Mercury or Saturn having the aspects of evil
planets, then the child born will be ill-developed (Pindakritiy but
if benefics aspect them such results ought nut to be predicted. If the
lord of conception occupies the 10th house from it and Ruhu occupws
the conception time the child will be bora with feet first. 188-189.

If the lord of the 8th from conception joins with Rahu and oceu-
pies conception Lagna then the child will be born with the umbilical
cord wound round its neck or head like a serpent. If haha aud
Gulika occupy any kendra or of the lord of conception joins with ike
lord of 8th and oceupies a kendra similar results have to be
predicted, 190.

Tf the Drakkana of conception Lagna is occupied by malefics, the
child will have similar cords. If the Drakkana of conception
happens to be Andaja or Surpaja the child born will have a similar

appearance, 191.
| NOTES.
T have already told my readers that Venkatesais an exhaus-

tive compiler and has tried to give as many‘useful combinations as
could be conveniently stuffed into a decent volume.

Children are born in various ways and forms and it can be
seen at once that the influenccs of the first as well as subsequent

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 59] =====
12 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

sexual unions between the couple have a great deal of effect upon °
the formation, capacity and prosperity of the future child.

There are normal as well as abuorma! births and the forma-
tions and malformations of the fretus are also often curious and
interesting.

First Venkatasa gives combinations for the birth of twins and
then for malformations among children. If the lord of the con-
ception Layna joins with the lord of the 8rd from it and both
occupy the conception sign, or if both of them are found in the
3rd from the conception time, then the birth of twins must be
predicted. He gives only two combinations for the birth of twins.
hose who want to have more knowledge about these facts can re-
fer to stanza -4 of Chapter V of Brihat jataka.

If the conception Lagna is combined with Mercury or
Saturn, having the powerful aspects of evil planets, like Mars,
Sun and weak Moon, then the foetal development will be stinted
and the child will becume a mass of flesh without well developed
organs and if these planets Buda and Sani have the beneficial aspect
these maltormations ought not to be predicted. It will be seen
here how important the conception time is and what special care
should be taken when aman wishes to join a woman for the
purposes of sexual union and reproduction. All children are ex-
pected to be naturally born with their head first. But there are
some instances in which children are born with feet first. This
is not considered to be auspicious. Ifthe lord of conception sign
is in the 10th from it and Rahu occupies the conception Lagna
then the child will be born with feet first and head after-
wards.

There are some children who are born with some covers and
other appendages. The author gives a few combinations to find
out these curious phenomena. »

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 60] =====
DgakKANA INFLUENCES. 193

Tf the lord of the 8th from conception and Rahu occupy the
conception Lagnathe child will be born with an wmbilical cord
round its head, neck or body in a curious shape- fashion.
Similar results areto be predicted when Rahu and Crudila are to-
gether in Kendra or the lord of conception and the 8th in Kendra.

If the Drakkana of conception time happens to be owned by
cruel planets then also the child will have similar appendages. Fop
Drakkanas see p. 25 of this book, also Chap. XXVIII, Brihatjataka
with BhattotPala’s commentaries.

Then he refers to two expressions called Andajas and Surpajas.
Those whoare born when the conception takes place in the Andaja
or Surpa Drakkana rising will have similar cords or cowls or hoods
covering them. Andajasare those which are born from .inda an egg
or bird Drakkanas and they are:—

2५ Drakkana of Mithuna Gemini.

Ist Drakkana of Simha—Leo.
3rd Drakkana of Thula--Libra. Surpa (Serpent) Drakkanas are
3rd Drakkana of Cancer (Kataka) Ist and 2nd Drakkanas of
Vrischika (Scorpio) and 3rd Drakkana of Meena {Pisces}. A few
remarks on sexual union will not be out of place.

Every sexual act is not followed by conception. When the
seed thrown by the male is retained in the womb of the female
conception takes place. The time at which the male fluid is
injected into the organ of the female and retained there for pur-
poses of reproduction, is technically called conception and this
time must fall into some Lagna or Zodiacal sign. In the month
of Aries at sunrise a person cohabits with a female and conception
takes place. Aries will be the conception time. Suppose the
person joined with a women just about the sunset in the solar
month of Aries on the 10th day, then the connection took place
in Libra which is the setting sign. If the male seed is retained

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 61] =====
194 Sarwartaa CHINTAMANT.

by the weman then Libra is the concestion time or sign. The
divisions of these signs, as usual, into 9 equal parts furnish us
‘with Nzawamsas. By mathematical calculations it is easy to find
in what Xayamsa concepticn took place with the necessary com-
binations of planets at the time. Those who wish to be eareful in
begettin & their progeny would do well to think of the proper
times for sexmal union. Females with ordinary intelligence find out
whether the seed is retained or not, and the time may be marked at
once for Suture guidance and predictions. They also know when
they are likely to conceive if sexually joined. The married
couple should be careful in their acts of reproduction, for they
have grcit significance and lead them to permanent misery or
happiness according as they join in gcod or evil times. We mostly
determine our own future and every care should be exercised for
our advantage.

शभग्रहाणांच हशाविरीनि जातोरगेवेंष्िदसंभवस्यात्‌ ।
छागोक्षकंटौ रवलश्नभूते भो मन्विते वागविजेनयुक्तं ॥
रागय शकाम्यांहिसमानदेहे नाब्ठेनसंवेष्टेतजातरेव ।
ल्य्नेपापे बहुपापटृष्टे राहुष्वजाम्यांसहितेधवात्र ॥
पापग्रहाणातुविचस्नभेवः जातोनरो ना्ठविवरष्टितांगः |
परस्परक्षत्रसभागतौवादेहांवुपाजनम वदेत्तदानीं ॥

Sranzas 102 - 193 & 194.
; 1 there ave beneficial aspects to the couception time, there will
he no srech results.

Ti Aries, Taurus or Leo becumes eoneeption time with Mars or
Saturn in it, the Sarparastanu will be in that part of the body which
is tudieated by the Naramsa. aj the conception sign.

Tf the birth is occupied by a malefie and aspected by amany evil
planets or if it falls in an evil planet's house with Rahw or Kethw in

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 62] =====
Mazrrar Misznms. 195

it, the child will hace Hee umbilical cord wound round it or eal hace
sone coud ar curerily.
Lf the birth is virucd by a malerie aud the lords at the bite aul

fourth metrally exchange their hovses the fuatent | siuettee

COUCH Ge

NOTES.

If there are beneficial aspects to the conception Lagna then the
above results ought not to be predicted. All the Zodiacal signs
represent different orzans of Aala-Purushe and hence the
human body. ‘Vo tind out which part of the body or organ wiil
have these appendages or circles ov coveriugs the author -2ys take
the Nueamse of the birth, and see where it falls. iheu the
organ governed by that sign would be affected by this Surya Vesti-
thu vr Nalavestitha, If coucepti.u isin Aries with evil plants, Mars
or Saturn in it and the Navamsa of conception falls.in ¢ aucer, then
heart or about the chest cf the child, the riug or the umbilical
cord or covering will be found.

(Refer to P. 17.3. Cancer represents the heart of Kala-
purusha.

If the conception sign is aspected by many evil plaicts and
has an evil planet in it, ov if it falls in a sign owned by an evil
planet and occupied by Rahu or Kethu or if the concep:ion sign
is owned by a malefic and he occupies the 4th house while the
lord of the 4th is in the conception the child will have round its
body many coils of the umbilical cord or similar ap :endages,
(See Stanaa 2 ch. V Brihat Jutuka). A careful study of these
combinations enables one to find out the circumstances and
peculiarities of the birth of children and to verify or falsify the
correctness of the times of birth given by those who are interested
in its welfare.

र भैश्वरोवाहिवुकेश्वरौ वाध्वजाियुक्तो जैर्नपश्लस्तु ।
पापवस्मद्यानिपल्मस्तुसौम्प्रानपुसकौकेद्रगतौ तदानीं ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 63] =====
vlna Ss "५ ^ ॥ राहि

196 SARWARTHA CHINTAMANL.

Stanza 195,
It malefies ave stroug, and benetics ave weal, with the lords of

conception and the 4h houses cechanging mutually their houses and

joined with Rake or Kethu, and cunuch planets ave in quadrants, there

mist de predicted birth of beasts.

NOTES.

Chapter IIL in Brihat Jataka is entirely devoted to the expla-
nation of such births and their classification. This opens up ॐ
wide field for inquiry and research and requires very special study
and high intelligence. Venkatesa says that for the above births
the evil planets must be strong and benefics weak and the qua-
drants must be occupied by Mercury and Saturn who are styled
impotent planets. The different sources of strength and classifica -
tion of evil and good planets have been clearly explained in the
First ( hapter.

Astrology is no ordinary science and it requires much know-
ledge, general intelligence and greet skill in using the informa-
tion stored in by the reader, The births above referred to are
called in this as in other Astrological works Vioyoni Jainna or
those which are born outside the Yoni or sexual organ of a human
female. |

Youu has been technically narrowed to mean the sexual organ

of 4 human female.

दष्टस्तयेवौयवियोनिरतरे चतुष्पदांजन्मबदति Tze: |

पापानलाल्या स्गृपपन सौम्यास्वगेदेतराशियुक्ताः ॥

खतुष्पदाजन्मतदा मदतिवदंति शाच्खातरपारगल्थाः।

-क्िहगाणेतुविलम्भूते बलान्विते नैवम्रहेणष््टे ॥

राशौ चरेवायदितश्नवांशे वियोनिजन्भेति बदद्ुधांशंके ।

सुक्रेकषितेगोमनन महिष्यास्स्यातमजे नाकिगतत्, 1 : `

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 64] =====
‘Braras or Carriu. 197
रहु्वजाम्यां साहितयदृष्टे मेषन्तुजातोनुपञुस्तधान्यैः |
टग्नेवुधक्ेत्रगंतिरिनाघे लम्नस्वितेतोमनुतेक्षितेबा ॥
जातत्तुत्तखीकन पुं्कस्याच्छन्यार योगाप्पुरषस्तुषंडः ।

PAT शशिवासरेशौ युग्भाजगाविदुजमानुपुतौ ॥

Sranzas 196-197-198-199-200.

Lf tw « Laguna matefies are strong and bevefics weak and it is
aspected by Mercury and Suturu predict quadruped births,

Tf evil planets strongly oveupy their own houses while beaeties do
not do so birth of quadrupeds is predicted by the learned in Astrolagy.

If Layna is tn a conunon sign and has the conception Dvakkana
(Pakshi) rising, strougly aspected by a malefic with a movable Naraiuse
or the Navamsa of Mercury, the birth of other than human species
must be predicted.

If such Luyna is aspected by 1 (11८६ the birth or COUR, if joined
with or aspected by Saturn buffidoes 5 if combined ov aspected hy
by Ruhu or Kethu rams must be predicted.

Sf birth falls in a Mercurial sign with lord of 6th in it and joined
or aspected by Mercury both the husband and wife become burpoteut.

If such a sign is occupied by Mars and Suturn the husbaud alone
becomes impotent.

If the Suv and Moon or Saturn and Merenry ocenpy odd aud
even signs respectively with mutual aspects they will produce
21100161 *
| NOTES.

In the last portions of the Stanzas 199 and 200 separate subject
has been introduced namely, the potency or impotency of the hus-
band and the wife or it may be of the male and female living to-
gether. As the Stanzas are interwoven they are putas they are
found in the original.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 65] =====
198. :: + SarwarTua CHINTAMANI

F

it .
The (4४५५८ means the sign of birth. ‘Ihe aspect of Mercury

and Saturn with the strength of malefics and the weakness of
benefics, produces quadruped species. But there are many kinds
of quadrupeds in the world with all of which men are not directly
concerned. ‘ihe most important domestic animals are named and
a knowledge of their prosperity is equally essential for the com-
fort of man.

If powerful malefics occupy their own houses while benefics
are not found to reside in their own signs the birth of quadrupeds
ought to be predicted. If powerful benefies occupy their own
houses, they will prevent a beastly origin and produce birth
among the human species.

In the previous Stanzs I stated about the Drakkanas, but a
more detailed information 1s needed here.

The 12 Zodiacal sigus are divided into three equal parts, each
of which is called Drukkuna. Thus in the whole Zodiac there are
12x3=36 Drakkanus. Their knowledge is essential. Male, female,
quadriped, bird aud serpent are symbolical names given to these
and IJ shall give a short description of each of then here. The
author has omitted their details although he refers to them
frequently.

Aries—Masha.

(1). Drakkana-male armed with weapons governed by
Mars.

(2). Quadruped female Drakkana, horse-faced ruled by the
Sun.

(8). Male armed with weapons, and cruel Drakkana owned

by Jupiter.

‘Taurus —Vrishaba.

(1). Female, fury Drakkana ruled by Venus.

(2). Male quadruped Drakkana owned by Mercury,

(3). Male quadruped Drakkana governed. by Saturn.  ,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 66] =====
Description OF DRakKANAS.

Gemini.—Mithuna,
{1). Female Drakkana ruled by Mereury.
(2). Male bird armed Drakkuna governed by
(3). Male armed Drakkana ruled by Saturn.

  

Cancer.—Kataka.
(1). Male quadruped Drakkana owned by the Moon.
(2). Female Drakkana ruled by Mars
(3). Male human serpent Drakkana governed by Jupiter

Leo.—Simha.
(1). Male, quadruped, bird Drakkans ruled by the Sun.
(2). Male, armed Drakkana ruled by Jupiter.

(3). Male quadruped, armed Drakkana governed by Mars

Virgo.—Kanya.
(1} Female Drakkana ruled by Mercury.
(2). Male armed Drakkana governed by Saturn.
(३), Female Drakkana owned by Venus.
Libra.-—T hul a.
(1) Male human Drakkana ruled by Venus.
(2) ‘Male bird Drakkana owned by Saturn.
(3) Male, monkey shaped quadruped Drakkana ruled by
Mercury:
Scorpio.— Vrischike.
(1) Female Serpent Drakkana ruled by Mars.
(2) Fema'e Serpent Drakkana ¢ rverned by Jupiter.
(3) Male quadruped tortoise faced lion shaped Drakkana
ruled by the Moon.
Sagittarius —Nhanas.
८1) Male quadruped horse bodied armed Drakkana govern-
ed hy Jupiter.
(2) Female Drakkana ruled by Mars.
(3) Male armed Drakkana controlled by the Sun,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 67] =====
20 ˆ GaRWwaRTHA CHINTAMANI.
Capricornus.—Makara.
(1) Male quadruped chained Drakkana ruled by Saturn.
(2) Female Drakkana ruled by Venus.
(3) Male armed Drakkana governed by Mercury.

Aquarius.—Kumba.
(1) Male eagle faced Drakkana ruled by Saturn.
(2) Female gary Drakkana governed by Mercury.
(3) Male Drakkana ruled by Venus.

Pisces. —Meena.

(1) Male sailing Drakkana ruled by Jupiter.

(2) Female we!l decked Drakkana controlled by the Moon.

\3) Male Serpent Drakkana ruled by Mars. (Vide Bhattot-

phala’s Commentaries on Chap. X XVII of Brihatjataka).

When malefics occupy their own houses and benefies do
not do so, the learned in astrology predict of quadruped
births. Here it seems to mean that the evil planets have a
tendency to make births beastly while good. planets raise
them far above the brute creation, The finest men—morally
speaking—must be those who have Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in
strong places. When malefics oceupy their own houses and the
benefics occupy their own houses quadruped births cannot be
predicted. By the expression—the learned wm astrology Venkatesa
clearly refers to the old authors who were—all of them without
any exception—Maharishis with splendid intellectual powers.

When the conception falls in a movable (chara) sign, and
bird Drakkana rises in it with a Navamsa owned by Mercury or is
itself a movable one, and is powerfully aspected by malefics, the
pirth of quadrugeds must be predicted. The four movable signs
(chara Rasis) are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricornus ruled “by |
Mars, Moon, Venus and Saturn respectively.

If the Navamsas rising are those of Mercury and the rising
Drakkana ju the sign is also movable with evil aspects and with-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 68] =====
Consunetions Propucine QuaDRUPEDS. 201

out beneficial looks, quadrupeds will be born. If sucha Lagna
is aspected by Venus, the birth of cows or bulls, if aspected by
Saturn or combined with him buffaloes and if aspected or joined
by Rahu or Kethu goats and sheep must be predicted. Much
discretiou has to be used in Judging of these combinations and
their intensity, by the astrologer and he must take special care to
see that he thoroughly understands these combinations before he
ventures on his predictions. There are many other subtle in-
fluences which have also to be taken into consideration in the
determination of the reproduction of human and other specie: of
animals. It may be argued that while human beings themselves,
do not keep any records of the times of their sexual unions or
conception times who is likely to keep any record of the union or
conception of beasts and so forth. What the astrologers mean is
that the prosperity or adversity of human as well as any other
animals can be ascertained and predicted by observing the work-
ing of planctary influences. In the crossing of animals, times may
be correctly kept and they may be veferred to astrologers for
future predictions regarding their careers.

All animals have their fortunes and misfortunes and they
can be judged by the combinations obtained at the time of con-
ception or of birth as the case may be.

From the predictions of quadrupeds and other peculiar births
Venkatasa takes the readers through some of the combinations
by which potency and impotency of the joining couple may be.
predicted. By the word potency perhaps the authors mean the
capability of sexual union by which reproductiou is ensured and
obtained. Men and women may think thatas long as they have the
necessary sexual capacity they are potent. This does not certainly
seem to be the case. Real sexual potency is that which produces
children at stated times. This potency may be present or »bsent in

both male and female or in any one of them. Here the stanzas are not
26

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 69] =====
202 Sarwaktity (प्राना.

very explanatory. He refers to bi-ths. But what are the readers to
understand. Is it the birth of the male or the female or does it refer
to both of them ? In sexual union tie marriage tie is not essential.
Children may be—and very often are—the results of immoral con-
nection and it is to be understood as referring to man and woman
who join together. A mau or woman may keep a host of lovers
and think that he or she is satisfying them sexually. This may
be true so far as the animal gratification is concerned, But this
does not really serve the purpose fur which sexual union is designed
by the all wise Nature ‘Lhere is no harm in consulting the
horoscozes{of both the male and the female and if union takes
place between a couple who have such unfortunate combinations
then the question of getting children becomes a hopeless task.
If birth falls in Gemini or Virgo the signs of Mercury with the
lord of the bth house occupying ihe sume aud if Mercury joins or
aspects such birth the husband aud wife both become impoteut.
They will have uo real power to reproduce their species, how-
ever often they may join in their sexual correspondence—and
they will not be blessed with any children. But when Gemini
or Virgo is combined with the jord of the 6th with Mars aud
Saturn the husband alone will become impotent. In such a case
the wife being capable of reproducing may bear children if she
Intries Or joins another potent man. Lt is a well known fact that
६ person who has no children by the first wife, begins to get
children as soon as he marries another woman. It is also known
that a woman who bears no children with one man, begins to bear
when she has connection legally or illegally with another person.
If the Sun occupies odd and Moon occupies even sign with
mutual aspects the child born will be an eunuch. If Saturn
occupies odd and Mercury even signs with mutual aspects -then
the birth of a eunnch must also be predicted. Venkatasa is
giving here 6 combinations for the birth of eunuchs or impotent

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 70] =====
Propuction oF Ivporexcy. 203

persons and he is simply reproducing the ideasof Varaha Mihira
in his own language. (Vide Bri, Jutuha Oh. IV. St. 13)

In the last combination there seems to be a little difference in
the wording of the slniu. Venkatasa makes Mercury in the even
and Saturn in the odd sign to produce an impotent person’s birth.
But Varaha Mihira makes that combination as Saturn in even and
Mercury in odd sign aspecting each other. Bhattotpala the
learned commentator of Brihat Jataka quotes a long passage from
Badarayana and supports his view. The mistake therefore
seems to be due to faulty preservation of the Zt or an oversight
of Venkatasa. If the sloka read Bhawuju Vindu Putron everything
would be alright: Preference must always be given to original
writers specially when they happen to be writers of Vyasa’s and
Parasara’s stamp.

There seems to be also a doubt in this stanza which is not
capable of easy solution. So far as Venkatasa has given azpecis
he has followed Varahamihira and his admirers but not the as-
pects of Jatmint (ride P90. Stanza 104 notes). Tf the Moon
is in an even sign aud the sun is in an odd sion how can they
aspect each other, aries is odd and suppose the sun is there.
Then the only sigu from which the Moon can aspect him would be
Libra, which also mnst be an odd sign. In any other place, there

annot be mutual aspects on a strong scale. Take an example.

-- - ----------------~ - --- ---

 

 

 

| |
| even. | on | even. | odd. |
; Sun. | |
77
| odd. | | even. |
____| Zodiac with |}
| | twelve signs. |
| even odd. |
(4५५ ।
| i
odd. | even. ea even. j

|

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 71] =====
204 Sarwastua CHINTAMANI.

If we take the fractional aspects then it is possible to verify
this statement. But in fractional sights neither the Sun nor the
Moon is strong and in the absence of better authority it must be
taken to mean the fractional aspects of the planets Sun and Moon.
Tf Moon is in Caneer, it is even, 4th from the San, and therefore
has a fractional aspect. From Cancer Aries is 10th, the Sun is
there and Moon aspects him in the 10th house. In the enumera-
tion of these six combinations for important births, Varaha-
Mihira is supported by Badarayana and other ancient writers, all
of whom give mutual aspects to the Sun and Moon in odd and
even signs as also to Mercury and Saturn. The best commentator
on astrology appears to be Bhattotpala and even this learned
scholar makes no reference in his commentaries to this impro-
bable combinations of mutual aspects to the Sun and Moon in odd
and even signs, It is very strange and I do not know what to
say about this. I suppose those adepts did not make much
difference among these fractional aspects and full aspects and
tacitly thought that the student who begins such high works
reqiures no special comments upon these points. At least
Bhatthotpela conld have hinted at the fractional aspects. The
readers are to notice such facts and draw their own inferences.
Tsimply point out facts where they ought to be noticed.

aE eg ee

~ Cs ~ 3 Nam = :
ओजलगोमूषिसुतोदिनेशं पड्यथधोयुग्मगतंतथैव ।
जीनेविरग्नकुम॒दास्मवधु स्तत्रस्थितोयुग्मगमौमदटण्ः॥
युग्मौजगाविदुवुधौक्ुजेन दण्डिने चनिश्चाकसंच |
षटूक्ोवयोगाःपुर षांशयुक्ताः परोक्तमहदवर्वहुशा्विद्धिः ॥

Sranzas 201 and 202.

(1) If Mars in an odd sign aspects the Sun in an even sign, or
has the Sun’s aspect —

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 72] =====
VARIETIBS IN I[MPOTENCY 205

(2) If the birth sign is odd with Moon in it having the aspect of
‘Mars in an even sign—

(3) If Moon is in an even sign and Mercury is in an odd sign
and have the aspect of Mars in any sign—

(4) If birth is in an even sign and Moon in an odd sign aid
occupy Male Navamsas with the aspect of Mars—in ull these cunbe-
nations the person born will become impotent.

NOTES.

Impotency may be here classified under various heads.
There are persons born as neutrals or eunuchs and they will have
their sexual organs ill developed to do their normal functions.
There are others who lose their potency at an early age by some
nervous disorders, and who become useless in their after lives for
sexual purposes. Some have weak sexual appetites and may be
classed as impotent, because they rarely seek cohabitation, and are
easily satisfied with a nominal connection.

There are others who by early abuse lose potency in a short
time and may be classed as useless for sexual connection. Some
have potency but have peculiar magnetic currents running in them
which keep them aloof and which never permit them to have any
thing with the opposite sex. On the other hand some persons
have been known to be sexually strong, but when the) are coupled
with a woman, they lose their potency on the very first contact,
and become incapable of further sexual intercourse. All these
cases apply to males as well as females with various grades of
differences, and the author here gives limits to find out the com-
petency of a person in his sexual correspondence and ability to
‘ reproduce his species for which function Nature seems to have
specially created him. Mars in an odd sign and the Sun in an even
sign with mutual aspects—fractional of course—take away the
potency of aman. If Moon and birth are combined and fall in an

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 73] =====
206 SapwartHa CHINTAMANT.

odd sign, and have the aspect of Mars in an even sign the potency
is similarly taken away. If Moon is found in an even sign and
Meroury oceupies an odd sign and have Martian sspect the

potency is taken away. Here it seems that the aspect of Mars
must be on both the Moon and Mercury, and not on one planet alone.

If birth falls in an even sign, Mo.n oceupies an odd sign, these
two are rising in male Navamsas having the aspect of Mars, then
the person becomes impotent. Furusha Navamsas may be ex-
plained in two ways, the Navamsas of male planets, or the odd

Navamsas which become masculine.

But I think the latter ig meant here. In the last combi-
nation Venkatasa differs from Varaha Mihira and Badarayana,
in not mentioning Venus along with Moon and birth and this may
be due to his following some other doctrine which he had before
him. Astrological writers seem to have had a great deal of
differences in treating of facts, and these may be due to various
experiences of adepts in astrology and the standards of judg-
ments they had. Varah Mihira says that if “ Birth, Moon and
Venus oceupy the male Navameas of any sign” the person will
be impotent. This differs from Venkatasa’s statement that birth
in a even sign with Moon in an odd sign having the aspect of
Mars, produces a eunuch. He further says that all the planets
must be occupying the Male Navamsas to produce these results.
There is no hint in Brihatjataka to this effect and I do not think
it is necessary to insist upon this latter statement of Venkatasa as
being correct. In the Sanskrit language the word for ewnuch is
Napumsa or one who has not the vitality of a purasha or male.

This must be specially borne in mind. There are many females
who have ill developed sexual organs unfit for sexual work, and

who consequently cannot conceive and bear children. I do not
know if the word Napumsa can be strictly applied to women.
The writers have used another and a more comprehensive word,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 74] =====
Parogiry of Birr. 207

Kliba or impotent and in this latter sense females as well as males
may be included.

In some places in astrology we apparently come across certain
combinations or aspects which do not happen now and which
therefore would sound as absurd. The older writers did not feel
these difficulties because whenever they found anything irrecon-
‘cileable they at once admitted their impcossivility during their
‘times, but plainly hinting that such combinations might have been
‘occurring during the earlier periods of worid’s history. Even
.Varaha Milira a profound astronomer and mathematician of un-
equalled ability and reach gives such combinations and says that
they might have been possible in the eurlier ages.

Sone ca tone
लग्नेश्वरश्वदरसुते नयुक्तो षंडीमतरेत्सभ्यिमैरद्ष्टः ।
दुस्थानगौकर्मङ्ाभावेनायौ बहोषि दग्नाधिपिस्तदानीं ॥
सौनतकमांदितरिनैवजाती पेन: प्रस्{-कोपितन्र |
छमेप्तपपि्वयतदूप्रव नातनरःप्राथमिकोपितते ॥
Sranzas 203 and 20-4.

Lf the Lord of hivth és with Mercury wed nol usperted by beneties
the person becomes impulent.

Tf the lords of the Gith aid LOth houses Prom birth orcapa
Dusthanas while the lord of the birth is wowerral the person will be
burn as the eldest awithont any religious Ceremuutes performed
whew he was tie the woreb.

If there is an evil planet in the 11th house or if the lord of the
Lith joins un evil planet the person w:ll be born as the eldest in a

family.
NOTES.

Here he gives one more combination for impotency and
changes the subject. Mercury isa thoroughly impotent planet
and if the lord of birth joins him without beneficial aspects, there
will be impotency.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 75] =====
208 SarwartHa CHINTAMANI.

Dusthunas are 6th, Sth and 12th and of these 6th forms one
of the houses of Oupackaya or improvement and therefore may not
be so very bad as the other two are. For the proper performance
of religious ceremonies one has to look to the strength of 9th and
10th houses and their lords. If they are unfavourable the person’s
mother will be neglected during pregnancy or will have irreligious
parents and husband who do not care to follow their religious pre-
cepts. Whenever the words religious ceremonies are used, the reader
must understand the rites or ceremonies prevalent among those
classes and sects to which the person belongs. Various Karmas
are prescribed for the superior caste Hindus, to be performed before
the birth of a child, and after its birth also to modify or neutralise
the previous karmaic evils.

The great object of all these ceremonies seems to be the spirit
of the maxim that “ prevention is better than cure.’ All births
take place as the results of previous karmaic acts and therefore
must be ascertainable to a tolerable exient by the astrological
adepts. vil and good influences are known, and tbe object of
these Shodasa Karmas or 16 rites to be performed for the benefit of
the child is to purify it as far as possible from terrestrial and
and therefore partly sinful deeds, and give it spiritual and reli-
gious energy to battle against evil temptations, to live happily in
this world, and to secure that bliss which ali Hindu Sastras and
sciences hold out to the sincere devotees. It serves therefore a two
fold purpose namely—an earthly good and a heavenly blissand both
these can be secured by studying carefully the previous causes for
these results and following the principles ofastrology. If the exertions
of man can prevent or counteract against the Karmic influences
flowing through the planetary agencies, then the writers say that
man must do all that lies in his power to overcome the evil influen-
ces indicated by the symbolical language of astrology. The 11th
must be occupied by an evil planet or the lord of the 11th must be
in conjunction with an evil planet to make the person the first

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 76] =====
Desorivtion of Birra PLacgs. 209

born in a family. He is called Seemanthe Putra and certain ad-
vantages are posseesed by him. Children born without the proper
rituals during the time of pregnancy of their mothers are naturally
less powerful in everv way than those who reap the benefits ac-

erning from such performances.

een ० अ+ -----

सिहूद येद्ररयुरगगृरं तत्कन्थोदयेनी चगृहेपिजन्म |
नवांखपुत्राधिपतिस्थार्ञेदधीरं जगुरुम्रदुकाणनाै : ॥

५4454 202,

(1 1/९ ascendant falls in Leas dhe house of beetle will have fave
doors, if it falls in Varqo, the place will be iciserable. Tf birth fells
in the Ist, 2ad ar Brd Drakkana of leqna, the segue whieh are
ovenpied by the lords af the Oth, WH aud Sth represent respectively

the condition und direction of the doors uf the birth place.
NOTES

Although short in Sanskrit the stanza is not very clear and
cannot be so expressed in the English language. If the birth
happens te fall in Leo the house will have two doors. If it is in
Virgo it will bea poor building. If Ist Drakana rises at the time
of birth then the direction of the door will be represented by the
sign occupied be the ruler of the 9th house from birth. If the
2nd Drakkana rises at the time, the house occupied by the lord of
the 19th represents the direction of the door. If tLe third Drakana
rises the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th represents the direction
of the doors. An example will better illustrate the author’s

meaning.

wo
~

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 77] =====
210 SARWALTHACHINTAMANT

Birth ;
Sun, Kethy, Saturn. |Jupiter.

 

 

 

 

 

| | Moon,

Birth is in Pisces in the first Drakkana. As per above stanza
the direction of the door will be represented by the sign occupied
by the lord of the 9th riz Mars. Mars is in Aquarius and this
sign represents the Westérn direction. I? the second Dralkana rose at
the time, find the house oceupied by the lord the 1%th who is Saturn.

This planet occupied Taurus and this represents the direction of
the doors aud of the birth slace. If the 3rd Drakkana rises, then

the house occupied by the lord of the Sth must be found out.
Lord of 5th from birth is Moon and he is in Virgo. This sign
therefore represents the direction of the doors. Consult similarly
for others. In Brihatjataka and Parasara H: ra these are explain-
ed at considerable length and [ refer the readers to those works
for further information. Venkatasa has been very brief in these
matters, so much so that a few facts read by themselves, are hkels
to mislead the student. But he has already teld his readers that
those items which are not related by him must he learnt from other

standard works on the subject.

दरार विलप्नाधिपतिष्थराशेः कैद्स्थतैर्वय॑तमन्वितैवा |
म्हि नांसास्पदवेस्मग्वी वाच्यास्तदानेोमुपसुतिकास्तु ॥
stanza 206.
The direction of the door in the house, where birth took place
must be predicted by the planets who are in quadrants to the lord of
the birth sign or by the most powerful of the planets,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 78] =====
Directors) or tHE Doors. 211
The nnmber wnd elutracter of the wonutn guthered at the plage of
birth nest be determined by the lords af the 2ud, Vth, LOth and dih

houses tram the sigue of birth.
NOTES.

In the previous stanza Venludase briefly gave hints ts tind out
the number of dours and the condition of the house. But now he
says about the directions of the doors, and the number of women
gathered at the place of birth and thei characteristics. In the
illustrative horoscope given above the lord of birth Jupiter is
found occupying Gemini, planets who are in quadrants
from this are the Moon in the 4th and the Sun in the 10th.
Moon isin Virgo which represents the southern direction. The
Sun is in Pisces which represents the North. These then are the
directions which the door or doors must be facing. Many of the
writers in sanskrit are not clear on this subject. Every door has
two directions, as van be seen by persons from inside or outside.
li one stands out uf the door aud looks into it the direction may
point to south. But it one stands in and looks out and he may be
facing the north. Here the aspect must be taken from inside and
not from outside. Li this does not tally with the actual experi-
ence of the birth place then he says the student must find out the
most powerful of the planets and ascribe the direction indicated
by the sign which is oceupied by him.

The sources of strength and weakness have been clearly
explained by Venkatasa in the first chapter and I refer the reader
to my notes there.

Having related atew combinations for the condition of the
house, doors and their direction Venkatasa now comes to determine
the number of women present when the birth of a child takes
place. Many of these combinations are given here with a view to
test the correctness of the horoscope with the actual facts of. the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 79] =====
212 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI

child's birth. They themselves may not be of much value when
considered separately.

The number of women who were in the place of birth are in-
dicated by the planets who are occupying the 2nd, the 10th, 4th, 12th
houses from the birth sryu. The beauty of perfectly developed
sciences is that they lay down principles which can be interpreted
according to the conditions where they are to be interpreted.
Suppose there are no planets in those houses it must not be sup-
posed that there will be no woman at the place. Combinations in
detail are given for these in Brihatjataka. Jt is there stated that
the number of women will be determined by the number of planets
who are found betweeu the birth sign and the sign occupied by
Moon.

धनिनि ।
तत्रस्थितेव्ानुसुते तुशू वैसथतक्षा्तयभूमिनीस्यात्‌ ।
राहूद्रनाभ्यामथजातिहीना अन्वैग्रेनातिसमापरतिष्ठा ॥
तस्थानवैस्संयुतलेचदरेदैःके विदुबाच्यामुपनूतिकास्यः |
ुर्विदुपुतसुरपूरनातस्तु ततस्थितेत्रहकुलाभिरा: ॥
ए तेषुपप्रहसतयुतेषु त।सांतुवैधभ्यमुदाहरन्त |
राह्ृष्वजाम्यां्हितेतु पूौस्तियवदेत्त्रशनेस्तुयोगात्‌ ॥
कृष्टाचकरुन्न(विधवामवेन्ता योग द्रूदाणां पवद चक्त्या ।
बहिःप्रदेशेगृदमध्यभागेदि श्यर्धमागस्ितलेचंः्रैः ॥
सेख्यावदेततत्रतदन्ययुक्तैः रेकक्षगेप्तत्रबहुत्वमाहुः ।

~ ON

दीपादि चांचल्यमुद द्रति चरस्थिरेचेधृतमलवाच्यं ॥
Sranza 207-208-209-210-211. ।
ff the planet im 2, 4, 10 and 12 is Saturn the women will be |
Sudras, if the Sun is there they belong. to Kshetrias. If there ar®

Rahu and Kethu there will be low caste or casteless women, and af
there are other planets, the women will belong to that caste which is

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 80] =====
Description or Women PRESENT. 313

indicated by them. Some writers say that the gathered women may be
found out by the planets whu ave with the lords of V2-10-4 and 2.
[f jupiter, Merveury and Venus oveayy the aboce houses the females
will be Brahmin. If evil planels ave with thei, they will be
Brahmin widous, if Rahu and kethu are with thein, the women twill
be sudras. If saturn is there: the momanwill be short, dark and
a widow.

By the planets who ure in Drisya chukra those femules who are
out of the room where birth takes place may .be predicted
and by the planets who are in Advisya chakra, those women who are
in the voom of birth may be predicted,

Those other planets in Drisyu aul Adrisya chakrus, which are
not ineluded in the abuve list, the member of omen gathered there
aust be predicted.

[f the birth falls in a movable sign the light in the birth place
would be flickering and moving, if it falls in a fived sign the light
would be steady.

NOTES.

If saturn occupies 2—4—I0 or 12 and without beneficial
aspects the womengathered will belong to lower orders of society.
Sudras area class in India. But when the application is to be
made to other women in other countries where there are no such
caste distinction then the astrologer must say that women of ordi-
nary classes were assembled there. If those houses are occupied by
the Sun,the women will be /shatriyas or warrior classes, These women
may be those who are the wives, daughters or other close relations
of military officers. If in the above houses there are other planets,
the women will belong tothat class which is indicated by the planets,
1f Jupiter is there they will be brahmins or those who belong to
the priestly class. If Rahu or Kethu is there, the women will be
from low classes, or from sankara or mixed classes. Here Venkatasa
gives the opinions of some writers who are not much esteemed but

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 81] =====
21s SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

still who have written works on Astrology. Whenever the word
kechit is used by the sanskrit writers it refers to those persons
who are of less repute and authority in astrological matters and
whose names could not still be passed over when they differ from
the older writers.

Venkatasa does not approve of their views and hence he uses
the word kvckit in a half contemptuous way. Some writers say that
by the planets who are in conjunction with the lords of 24-10 and
12 the castes of women gathered at the place of birth may be ex-
plained. ‘then there is a sort of repetition which is made here to
emphasize what ha: been already explained in the previous stanzas.
Guru, Sukra and Buda there predict Brahmin women. If they
have evil conjunctions they will be Brahmin widows. If they
have the conjunction of Ralu and Kethu, they will be Sudras. Lf
Saturn is there, the woman will be short, dark and a widow. hat
Which is seen is called Drisya Chakra aud that which cannot be
seen is called Adrisya Chakra, During the day and night men are
only able to see half the sky. Krom the Kast and the West the
distance is nearly 180 °. During the day we can only see half the
globe and in the night the other hali- hese are technically divi-
ded as fullows—Drisyachakra comprises all those 6 signs which
are counted backwards from Lagna. Adris)achakra comprises
those six sigus which are counted from Lagna forwards. Take an
example. If 10° in Aries is the birth time then the six Signs,
viz. the first ten degrees in Aries, Pisces, Aquarius, capricornus,
Sagittarius, Scorpio and the last 20 degrees in Libra form the Drisya
Chakra, The last 20 degrees in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer
Leo, Virgo and the first 10 degrees in Libra form what is called
the Adrisya Chakra. he number of planets in the Drisya Chakra
determines the number of women outside the birth room, and the
number of planets in the Adrisya Chakra determines the number
of women inthe birth room. Here the number of women: may, be

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 82] =====
Natcre ann Vosirion oF Licut. 213

very large. Here we have to eonsider only those who are directly
concerned with the delivery business.

Then again we have also to consider the exaltations, and other
sources of strength and weakness of the planets and increase or
decrease the number accordingly.

Movable signs, with birth sion in them give the light unsteadi-
ness. Steady or fixed signs make light in the birth place steady
All these have to be examined witha view to definitely settle the
Lagna with greater certainty.

The skill, ability and intellectual reach of rhe astrologer must
be very great and his personal experiences in dealing with horns-

copes must indeed be remarkable.

RAMU समन्वितश्वेत्‌ दं दस्यसीखग्दिविनागमःहः ।
तादुक्फलनाशगतस्तुत्तोपि sp क्षितश्वद्रमन्वयासात्‌ ॥

Sranza 212.

| [f lord of birth is in conjunction irith evil plinet, the health will
suffer: the same result aill hanpen UF the lord of Layua ocenpies the
8th house from tt. If Lord of bivth ts beurticialla aspected the ceil
should not be predicted.

NOTES.

Venkatasa now takes the readers to the good or bad health
of the natives. Lagna or birth indicates the body and when its
lord is joined by an evil planet the health suffers. 8th from it is
called Nasa or house of destruction or loss and if the lord of birth
occupies it then also bad health must be predicted. But if there
is the aspect of a benefic the evil will he absent or considerably
modified. The word Nasu refers tothe 12th house as well and that
also signifiies destruction and death. But generally Nusa refers to
Mrityu Stana or the 8th house, and Varaha mihira and other emi-
tient writers support my view and because I consider 8th as the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 83] =====
214 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

still who have written works on Astrology. Whenever the word
kechit is used by the sanskrit writers it refers to those persons
who are of less repute and authority in astrological matters and
whose names could not still be passed over when they differ from
the older writers.

Venkatasa does not approve of their views and hence he uses
the word kechit in half contemptuous way. Some writers say that
by the planets who are in conjunction with the lords of 2-410 and
14 the castes of women gathered at the place of birth may be ex-
plained. ‘i hen there is a sort of repetition which is made here to
emphasize what has been already explained in the previous stanzas.
Guru, Sukra and Buda there predict Brahmin women. If they
have evil conjunctions they will be Brahmin widows. If they
have the conjunction of Rahu and Kethu, they will be Sudras. Lf
Saturn is there, the woman will be short, dark and a widow. Vhat
which is seen is called Drisya Chakra and that which cannot be
seen is called Adrissa Chakra. During the day and night men are
only able to see half the sky. From the East and the’ West the
distance is nearly 180 >. During the day we can only see half the
globe and in the night the other hali- These are technically divi-
ded as fullows—Drisyachakra comprises all those 6 signs which
are counted backwards from Lagna. Adrisyachakra comprises
those six signs which are counted from Lagna forwards. Take an
example. If 10° in Aries is the birth time then the six signs,
viz. the first ten degrees in Aries, Pisces, Aquarius, capricornus,
Sagittarius, Scorpio and the last 20 degrees in Libra form the Drisya
Chakra, The last 20 degrees in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Caneer
Leo, Virgo and the first 10 degrees in Libra form what is called
the Adrisya Chakra. ‘The number of planets in the Drisya Chakra
determines the number of women outside the birth room, and the
number of planets in the Adrisya Chakra determines the number
of women inthe birth room. Here the number of women: may, be

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 84] =====
Nature ann Position of Lian. 915

very laroe. Her gi ।
y large. Here we have to consider only those who are directly
concerned with the delivory business.

॥॥ १ 7 + : .

hen again we have also to consider the exaltations, and other
ources of strength and weakness of the planets and increase or
decrease the number accordingly.

Movable signs, with birth sion in them give the light unsteadi-
ness. Steady or fixed signs make light in the birth place steady
All these have to be examined with a view to definitely settle the
Lagna with greater certainty.

The skill, ability and intellectual reach of the astrologer must
be very great and his personal experiences in dealing with horos-
copes must indeed be remarkable.

 सपनश्वरःकूर समन्वितश्चेत्‌ देदस्यसीष्गदिविनाश्ञमाहः ।
तादुक्फड्नाक्गतस्तुसोपि श्ुभेक्षितशवेद्रकमन्वथासात्‌ ॥

Sranza 212.

Tf lord of birth is in conjunction with evil planet, the health will
suffer: the same result will happen af the lord of haqua oveupies the
8th house from tt. If Lord of bia th is beneficially aspected the evil

should not be predicted
NOTES

Venkatasa now takes the readers to the good or bad health

of the natives. Lagna or birth indicates the body and when ita
lord is joined by an evil planet the health suffers 8th from it is

called asa or house of destruction or loss and if the lord of birth

occupies it then also bad health must be predicted. But if there

is the aspect of a benefic the evil will be absent or considerably

modified. ' The word Nasa refers to the 12th house as well and that

also signifiies destruction and death But generally Nusa refers to

' Mrityu Stana or the 8th house, and’ Varaha mihira and other emi-
Heit Writers’ support my view and because I consider 8th as the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 85] =====
516 SaARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

House meant by Venkatasa. If the lord of Lagna is well aspected
and situated the person commands good health and much personal
influence.

 

दुस्ानपेनापिचिख्मनषटे युतेविल्मतनुरोगभाकस्य त्‌ ।
पापेविल्भनेतुबशेप्रहीने लमेश्वरोयेगनिपीडिस्यात्‌ ॥

Stanza 213,

[f the Tova of bivth is in bivth with the lads of Oth, 8th, 12th the
body will be subjected te coustent compluints. If the lord of birth 15
porrerless, and eril planets ceenny birth then the body suffers from
Tisea re.

NOTES

The lords of Oth, Sth, and 12th are called Deesthanadhi Pathies
or planets owning evil honses, 8th and 12th are declared to be
evil, but Oth represents debt. disease and enemies and therefore
its lord ix also evil. Jf the lord of the birth sign is in the Lagna
with anv one «f the lords of dth, Sth, or 12th houses, the body
will be subjeeted tu minch disease. Tf all of them join there then
the man will be an invalid

Ty the lord of birth is powerless. (6. e. occupying unfavour-
able situation and so forth, the person will have constant diseases
if here is an evil planet in the birth.

From these a general prineiple may be drawn—namely—that
if the lord of birth is strong, and has powerful good aspects and
associations the man keeps good health, but when the condition is
reversed the person becomes sickly and subjected to diseases.

 

नल्व पेसातिल्म्रनाये केद्निकोणेसतिरोगभाक्स्यात्‌ ।
छन्नश्च. धिष्टतराशिना शो दुस्थानगोदुकुल्डेह मक्स्यात्‌ ॥
Sranza 215. ।
118 11111111 Trikonas,
the person has bad health. Tf the lord. of the sign is occupied by the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 86] =====
Hots& SIGNiFIcaTions. 217

birth-lord is found to he posited in the 6th, Sth, er 12th house the
native has sickly vonstitution.
NOTES.

If the lord vf birth is weak and occupies kendras cr 1st, th,
‘th and 10th; or Thrikonas or 5th and 9th houses, the health
will be bad and the man will be sick! y- If the lord of the sign
‘ occupied by the lord of birth, is found to occupy 6th, &th or 12th
houses from the Lagna the mvi besomes sickly. Thun. not only
the lord of birth must be strong but also the Lord af the house
occupied by the Lord of birth.

 

तत्तद शाधिष्टतरा्िनायैः दुस्थेविंरग्नादिविनाशमाहुः ।
पपिविलन्नग्ठिकेलिकोणे कदर धेनाधेगुक्ठिकेनयुक्ते ॥
Spanza 215.

If the lovds of the sigus occupied bu the respective Bharadhi
Pathies (Signiticutors) happen to join Dusthanas or eril houses
the eril must be predicted for all those events which ave indicated by
those houses. If an evil planet is in Lugua, and Gulina oreupies
Thrikonas with any of the Kendradinathas, then there rill be eril
to the person horn.

NOTES.

This stanza is not soveryclear. If there is to b= an exami-
nation of any horoscope, there are 12 signs or houses counting,
from the Lagna birth sign) and each sign indicating different
events in a person’s life. First or Lagna indicates body, color,
dimensions etc. Second represents speech, eyes, wealth, and
family. Third house indicates brothers, courage, maid servants
ete. Fourth represents education, mother, morality and lands.
Fifth shows children, intelligence and counselling power. Sixth
explains debts, enemies and diseases. Seventh rules wife, pas-
sions and marriage. Higth indicates longevity, travels, death.
ete. Ninth ifidicates father, piety, reliziousness etc. ‘enth isthe

I ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 87] =====
98|| SARWARTHACHINTAVANT.

house of reputation, Success, influence and politics, Eleventh
proves friends, popularity, elder brothers and twelth rules losses,
bed rooms, sin and heaven. Venkatesa gives a general principle
of Astrology, that if a person wants to know any one of these
Bhavas or significations, he has to see to the lord of that and also
examine the strength of lord of the sign which is occupied by the
Bhavadhipathi.

 

 

 

-------- a
Moon, L ॥
, Lagna, aturn,
Rahn, : i Satu
नि 11111111 ॥। ॥ |
i i ।
> Stn | i
Mercury. | '
Jupiter. | Rasee :
1--- Born on a Pe |
| ! Tuesday,
॥ ॥
j
| _
: |
/ ' Mars.
i Venus. | | lars

{ [
: i

Knja, | |

Take an illustration and consult any Bhava. The fifth
Bhava or house indicates children ete. Taurus is the 06114.
The lord of the Sth is Mercury and he is in 10th house with jupiter
and the sun. The lord of the house occupied by Mercury is
Saturn and he is found {pn the 2nd house with beneficial aspects
of Venus and Jupiter. The native has children but he lost some
on account of the position of Mercury with reference to the 5th
house as he occupies the 6th house from the house of children,

In this way any Bhava or signification should be analysed
and its results must be calculated,

Gulika is referred to hers. (Vide pp. 49 and 50 notes.)

The easiest way of finding out the position of Gulika in a
horoscope is thus given—count the week day from Saturday and
multiply this number by 4 and subtract 2 from the total. Gulika

, must be placed in that sign which rises at the number of ghatikas

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 88] =====
Postrion or GULikAa. 219

So obtained. The person above given was born on a Tuesday.
From Saturday to Tuesday the number is 4 This multiplied by
4 will give 16. Two must be subtracted from this aud thus we
have a balance of 14 which represents the number of ghatikas
after sunrise on that day at which Gulika has to be fixed The
sun rise was in Aquarius aud by calculation of the extent of
each of the succeeding signs till we get to that at which 14. gulikas
fall. It will be seen that Gulika falls in Taurus or the Lagna
itself.

In this way Gulika's position may be found out. If birth has
an evil planet, and Gulika joins lords of Sth and 9th, dhd Ist, 4th,
7th and 10th houses, and occu. ies Sthor 9th then any Bhuva or
house will suffer Similarly. Wherever Giulia is found to occupy
he will do evil to those events which are signified by that house.

 

EN

लभ्नश्वरेपापयुतेषिलमरे राहुथदावंचनचौकभीतिः ।
TITAS AIT धुवावचनं चो रूपैः ॥

Stanza 216.

ff the lord of birth is in conjunction with an ecil 117
44 ०८८५१८८४ = 1/4, /॥८ person has Jears fron deveption und
thieves. Aud if to the ubvee cumbinutiwn there is the eon Junction ov
aspect of Saturn, there will be fear frou cheats, thieves and rulers.

NOTES.

Tt is very essential for the well being of a person that his birth
lord should be strong and that evil conjunctions should not be
found in the birth sign, If Rahu occupies Lagna and its lord is
in conjunction with an evil planet then the person will be casily
cheated, his property stolen and he will become a great loser. 1;
saturn is aspecting or combining such a combination with as that
given above then there will be losses through the ive uf the rulers
who happen to be bad men.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 89] =====
220 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL.

राहुर्विल्ेसकुजेकैषत्रे प्यतेवृहद्वीनमुदाहराति ।
लतश्वरमृद्युगते रा रंर्पापेतुतद्रवाद्‌ा ॥

Stanza 217

ff Rohu, Kuja and Sani weruy Lagua, the person will have
swollen trstivlus, If the hirth lord, Rahu and another evil planet
oveupy the Sth house, there will be similar diseuse.

NOTES.

Hydrocele is a nasty form of disease in the testicles by which
men are often ettacked in dirty cities and climates, ‘This is certain-
ly a misfortune and must be a constant source of misery to the
person who has it. If the evil planets Rahu, Kuja and Sani are
found in the Lagna then the person will have this unfortunate
complaint. The swelling and pain depend upon the intensity of
the evil planets who are located there. If they are very bad then
the nature of the discase will be bad; if they are weak, the swelling
will be ordinary. This is one combination. Then again Venkatesa
gives another. If the lord of birth, Rahu and another evil planet
occupy the Sth house, the person will have swollen testicles. In
the division of bodily organs and their identification with those
of Kalapueusha, 8th house Tepresents sexual organs and _ testes
and hence if evil planets are found there, the person will have
enlarged teszicles.

nim
PRU TST केदकृेमादियुतितदेव ।
ते श्वकतितदं TTT हवा रमाथादिभिरन्विदश्चः ॥

Stanza 218.

Tj’ Rahu occupies Lagna, Gulika Joins Thrikona, and Kuja and
Mandi are found in a Keniva, there will be testicle enlargement. If
the lord of' the sign orcupied by the Lord of birth in Navamsa,
joins Ruhu, Mandi and Mars, then also testicles will be swollen.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 90] =====
VxsticaL COMPLAINTS. 21
NOTES.

I have already explained what is meant by Mandi ule p.
49). In stanza 217 1 have shown how Gulika has to be fixed.
There are nine principal planets and there are nine subordinate
planets called in sanskrit Upayruhas as opposed to Mulhya
grahas. If birth sign is ccecupied by Rahu and Sth and 9th
houses by (rudika and Kuja with Mandi is found in a kendra, the
person will have enlarged testicles. This isa permanent disease,
and will be troublesome during bad periods and subperiods,
giving a little relief in gocd periods or eyen perfect cure, if the
period is completely good, ‘lhe permanent as well as temporary
effects of planets will have to be compared and a resuliant must
be struck to give the real prediction. The latter portion of the
stanza is difficult to explain briefly. Many more stanzas appear
in future in this direction and it would be better to explain there.
The lord of the birth must be occupying some Navamsa as a matter
of fact, After fixing him and the Navamsa, tind out the lord of
the Navamsa thus occupied by the birth Lord. ‘There if the lord of
the Navamsa, occupied by the birth lord joins Rahu, Mandi and
Kuja, the person will have Hydrocele. Suppose he is only with
one of those planets, can the evil results be predicted ? I think
there is evil to some extent, but the full evil has to be predicted
only when the combination is full and strong.

 

atemaqegintcchaage राइ्य॑शपतिस्सर।ह्‌ : |

खमेश्वरभूमिसुतेतनुस्ये प। पानवितैपापावेरीकितेवा ॥

शिलप्रहि्िणगुत्तमागे मसूरि भिव कथयेतितज्ञा; ।

शनत चिदरूणमुततमा डेद(नाभिशस्तैःपतेनेनवापि ॥
81 ४४45 १19-~220.

11111111 11111011 lord of the 8th, is
in conjunction with Rahu there will be enlarged testicles. Ifthe lord

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 91] =====
220 SARWARTH ACHINTAMANIL.

>

राहुविलत्रेसकुजेरकवतरे स्वितेवृहद्वीनमुदाहरंक्े ।
Batata रसपापेतुतद्ेवन।दा ॥
Stanza 217

Lf Rhu, Kuja and Sani verupy Lagua, the person will have
steollen testivivs, Ly the hirth lord, Rahu und another evil planet
ovrupy the Sth house, there will be similar d iseuse,

NOTES.

Hydroele is a nasty form of disease in the testicles by which
men are often attacked in dirty cities and climates, This is certain-
ly a misfortune and must be a constant source of misery to the
person who has it. If the evil planets Rahu, Kuja and Sani are
found in the Lagna then the person will have this unfortunate
complaint. The swelling and pain depend upon the intensity of
the evil planets who are located there. 11 they are very bad then
the nature of the discase will be bad; if they are weak, the swelling
will be ordinary. This is one combination. Then again Venkatesa
gives another. If the lord of birth, Rahu and another evil planet
oceupy the 8th house, the person will have swollen testicles. In
the division of bodily organs and their identification with those
of Kalapucusha, 8th house represents sexual organs and _ testes
and hence if evil planets are found there, the person will have
enlarged testicles.

tiene
स्तेषराहनुव्कितनिकोणि केदिकुने मांदियुततदैव ।
eames राहा रमांयादिमिरन्विदश्चत ॥

Stanza 218.

Tf Rahu ceeupies Lagna, Gulike Joins Thiikona, and Kuja and
Mandi are found in a Kendra, there will be testicle enlargement. If
the lord of the siyn orcupied by the Lord of birth in Navamsa,
Juius Ltuhu, Mandi and Mars, then also testicles will be swollen,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 92] =====
1४७१८५0 (09.21.41६ 31
NovTeEs.

I have already explained what is meant by Mandi Vide p.
49). In stanza 27 1 have shown hw Gulika has to be fixed.
There are nine principal planets and there are nine subordinate
planets called in sanskrit Upugrakas as oppused to Mubkhya
grahas. If birth sign is cecupied by Rahu and 5th and 9th
houses by G'ulika and Kuja with Muidi is found in a kendra, the
person will have enlarged testicles. This is a permanent disease,
and will be troublesome during bad periods and subperiods,
giving a little relief in gocd periods or eyen perfect cure, if the
period is completely good, he permanent as well as temporary
effects of planets will have to be compared and > resuliaut must
be struck to give the real prediction. The latter pertion of the
Stanza is difficult to explain briefly. Many more stanzas appear
in future in this direction and it would be better to explain there.
The lord of the birth must be occupying some Nayamsa aS a matter
of fact. After fixing him and the N avamsa, find out the lord of
the Navamsa thus occupied by the birth Lord. There if the lord of
the Navamsa, occupied by the birth lord joins Rahu, Mandi aud
Kuja, the person will have Hydrocete. Suppose he is only with
one of those planets, can the evil results be predicted ? I think
there is evil to some extent, but the full evil has to be predicted
only when the combination is full and strong.

 

steagecintacchatga रादयंशपतिरंसराह : ।
खतरश्वरभूमिसुतेतनुस्ये पा पान्वितैपापवरोकितेवा ॥
शिलमरहध््िणगृततमागे मसूरिभिवौकेथयतितक्ञा; ।
शनैतव चेदरणपुत्तमा डदावाभिश्तैःपतनेनवापि ॥
81५४458 219--220. ।
Ff the lord of the Navausa oceupied by the lord of the Sth, is
in conjunction with Rahw there will be enlaryed testicles. If the lord

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 93] =====
299 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

of birth and Mars oveupy birth sign and are joined hy evil planets or
have their aspects, there will be wound or soar in the head by stone
cul or by a kind of sword. If Saturn joins the lord of birth instead
of Mars, and there is a similar combination there will be wounds
im the head by falls, rocks, Jires or other instruments.

NGTES.

The lord of the 8th house from Lagna must occupy some
Navamsa, Take the lord of this Navamsa, and if he is in combi-
nation with Rabu, then there will be testicle disease. There are
many kinds of testicle diseases, The disease here referred to is
Brihat-Bija or enlargement in the testicles. Various degrees of
enlargement of testes may be observed. In some nasty centres of
civilisation and enlightenment, there “may be seen testicle as
large as big pumpkins, and they must certainly be a source of the
keenest misery to the possessor. Sharp and shooting pains, want
of energy in them or some internal rottenuess in the testes are not
to be classed under these combinations. 1 Mars joins the Lord of
birth and both are in Lagna having evil conjunctions or aspects,
the person will have some wounds in the head, there will be cuts
from stones or marks left by some kinds of swords. Mars is an
evil planet. ‘lhe other evil planets are the Sun,Saturn, weak moon,
badly associated mercury and Rahu and Kethu. If any or all of
these join in the birth, then there will be larger cuts or deforming
marks in the head. ‘he extent and pain inflicted by these scars
or wounds or weapons vary with the iutensity of the evil planets,
their conjunctions and their aspects. If Saturn joins the lord of
birth and occupies Lagna, having evil conjunctions or aspects,
then there will be cuts from stones, instrunients, fires, wounds or
sores. ‘Lhe occupation of Lagna by its Lord in conjunction with
Mars or Saturn, and having the combination of other éyjl platiets
of their aspects leads to such sores or cuts. tf the evil planets ure
really bad and the lord of lagna is weak then these sores or cits

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 94] =====
LeaNness AND STouTNEss. 223

will be severe and may lead to permanent injury or deformation.
If the lord of lagna is well situated, exalted and joined with or
aspected by beneficial planets then slight injuries have to be
predicted from these sources and there will be nominal marks
left upon the head of the person. The intensity of evil or good
indicated by the planets,has always to be judged by the sources of
planetary weakness or strength and in these matters each astrologer
must be guided by his own intelligence, knowledge and experience.
He can get valuable hints from competent experienced astrologers
and he ought to avail himself of these sources of instruction when-
ever he can do so,

eee

शण्कंखगेल्नगतेविलनने शुषकेयददे दक शत्वमाहुः ।

srt THREAT aay ||

रभ्नाधिपेना शगतेतुडाण्क राौतनौष्ुष्कमतीवकण्टं ।

लम्नाधिपस्यांशपगाशिनिडषक प्रदस्वस्तनुडष्कमाहुः ॥

PRAM TITHE - ।

लश्नेजरकसुभेद चरेनदैक्ते तनुस्थौल्यमुदादरन्ति ॥
Sranzas 221-222-993,

If sushka planets occupy the Lagna, the body will Be lean or
emaciated : If lagna falls in any of the sushka rasis, the result will
be similar, Ifthe lord of Lagna joins with the sushi planets, or
occupies their houses the body will be emaciated. (221.)

[f the lord of the birth occupies the Nasa, or if birth falls in
sushka rasi, the body will be lean or withered. Lf the lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of Lagna, is in conjunction with.
sushka grahas, the body will be emaciated. (222.)

Lf birth falls in sushka rasis and evil planets combine there the
body will be emaciated.

If Lagna falls iy jala rasis and good planets orcupy tt, the body
becomes stout, (228.)

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 95] =====
224 SARWARTHCHINTAMANT.

NOTES.

Venkatasa has not explained what is meant by sushka grahas
or planets, and after careful search for them, I find an authority
in Badaravana or Veda Visa

Ravi; Kuja and Sani are called sushia grahas or loan planets.
Sukra and Chandra are classified as jada grahas or dull planets
the rest of the planets must be taken to be well developed or
stout. Here it is understood that if Ravi, Kuja or Sani occupies
Lagna, or if the lord of Lagna occupies sushka Rasis then the
body will be very Jean or emaciated. All the 12 sigus of the
Zodiac are divided into Poorna jala, Ardhajala, Padajala and

Nirjala Rasis or houses.

Poornajala «full watery) signs are ,—Meena (Pisces),
Karkataka (Cancer’ and Makara (Capricornus),

Ardhajala (half watery) signs are :—Kumbha (Aquarius),
Vrishabha (Taurns) and Dhanses (Sagittarius).

Padajala (quarter watery) signs are :—Mesha (Aries), Thula
(Libra,) and Vrischika (Scorpio),

Nirjala (waterless) signs are;— Mithunam (Gemini)
Simham (Leo) and Kanya (Virgo). By sushka Rasis, which
have not been properly explained in any of the works.
T am acquainted with—Venkatasa may mean the Padajala
and Nirjala Rasis or the houses of the sushka Planets—viz., Sun,
Mars and Saturn. If we are to accept either of these explanations,
the difference would not be much except in the case of Mithuna
and Kanya both of which areowned by Mercury. The Ardha Jala
and Padajala signs are mostly owned by the evil planets called
sushka grahas. ॥॥॥

If Ravi, Kuja and Sani occupy birth, or if birth Lagna falls
in any one of their signs, or if the lord of birth joins with Ravi

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 96] =====
9५)
a doe

CAUSES FOR BMACIALION.

Kuja, Sani, or if the lord of birth falls in the 72th, or the Sth
house, the body will be emaciated, or lean or withered up. The
person never grows stout, although he may take all pussible care
of it. Jt must be borne in mind that, while habits have an in-
fluence on body and mind, they do not form the entire causes.
Planetary influences must be considered with reference to the
determination of the mind and the mysterious power of the sou! or
Jeeva in the body. After the life leaves the body, stoutness or
leanness will be subjected to the all powerful vayoo (air) called
Dhananjaya which spreads entirely over the body and begins its
work of putrefaction and separation of the Pancha Mahabootas.
This question is very interesting and deserves to be carefully
studied in its proper place. If the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the birth lord joins with Ravi, Kuja or Nani
or occupies any of the /evu signs, then the body will be lean or
emaciated. The emaciation depends upon the intensity and
strength of the evil planets and that of the Lagna. ‘ithe three
planets named above are, purely evil planets and therefore
it may be safely asserted that if evil planets occupy Lagna, or
join with its lord, stoutness ought not to be predicted. ‘his
statement again has to be modified with reference to the signs
which are occupied by the evil planets or in which the Lagna falls.
Suppose birth isin Cancer or Pisces, and Ravi, Kuja or Sani
occupies it, or joins the lord of Lagna, then much leanness
ought not to be predicted. Suppose Scorpio, Aries or
Leo or Acquarius is occupied by Guru or Sukra, then much
leanness ought not to be predicted. ‘he reader is expected to use
his knowledge and judgment carefully and summarise the varicus
sources of strength and weakness before he makes his predictions.
Then again if the birth falls in a ean sign and its lord joins with
Guru or Sukra, emaciation ought not to be predicted. If the
birth falls in a lean rasi, and all the Jean planets occupy that with-

out favourable conjungtions or aspecty then the person will have a
2 il

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 97] =====
226 SABWARTHACHINTAMANI,

withered body and will be subjected to constant illhealth and
chronic complaints like piles, asthma, dispepsia, diabetes or gene-
ral debility. In the first half of the 222nd stanza Venkatesa has
used the word Nasa, Searching for its meaning, two interpreta-
tions are found and they are (1) Nasa means—the Sth house from
Lagna and (2) the twelfth house from Laona. Nasa generally
means destruction or loss and we may well select the twelth house
instead of the 8th. The general principle ef bodily comfort is
based upon the good position of the lord of birth and when he
occupies the 12th or house of loss from it this must necesearily
refer to loss of health or lossof the normal development of the
body. he 6th, 8th and 12th houses are called Dusthanas or evil
houses, and if the lord of Lagna occupies any one of them, then
the siguification (Bhava) indicated by him viz body—must suffer.
But the word Nasa referring to the 8th house means loss of life
more than loss of normal development in the physical body and I
humbly suggest that the word Nasa here may be taken to be the
12th house instead of the 8th. However my personal experience
has shown me that the body suffers much when its lord occupies the
th housealso. Guru has been specially described as a stout planet
and if he occupies the Lagna, and if it falls in a watery sign the
person becomes stout, and puts forward flesh rapidly. Venkatesa
describes combinations for leanness and after that he commences
with planetary conjunctions for corpulance or stoutness. Leanness
is less than normal bulk, and stoutness is more than usual bulk
If birth fails in jala rast and good planets join or aspect it then the
body will %e stout
9 INS ees

शभ्राधिपर्तोयखगोनख्ल्या स्तीम्यान्वितशवै्तनुष्टिमहु

छभ्नाधिपश्चज्जलराशिसंस्थ इशुभ।न्वितस्तोयखभेनदष्टः ॥

सप्रैडुमक्षेनगतेषिवैवं र्मैश्वर स्थांशपतीनल््ं ।

WaT स्त्नेडभेक्षेतरगतेपि पं ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 98] =====
Combinations For Srourness. 227
शरेगुरौतेननिरीक्षितेवा जखक्षगेणापिजलेविलन ।
सीम्यानवितेशोभनखे चरैः दण्टेप्वातिस्थौस्यमुदाहरंति ॥

Sranzas 224-225-226,

Ff the lord af Lagat isa jalayriha, is strony and lis the con-
junetion at good planets the body becoues stont s If the lora of Lagne
is in a jularasi, has conjunction with good planets, and has the
aspect of jalaqrahas, and if Laqna falls in any houses ef the aus-
picivus planets, the person bevomes stout. If the lord of the Nacainsa
oven pied by the lord of Laqna, joins a jalarasi, unaspected by evil
planets, and the Lagna falls in an auspirious sign, thew also the
person will become corpudent ov stout, If Guru oveupies Lugna or
aspects Lugna irhen he ucenpies a jalarast, if the Tagua falls ina
jalarasi, or has the aspect of good planets, or their conjunction, the

person becomes unusually stunt.
NOTES.

Jalagrahas are two viz., Chundra and Sukra. (Moon aud Venus)
(see Brihat Jataka Ch. II. ver. 6), That these two planets are
watery globes are further illustrated by their becoming vowerful
when they oceupy thefourth house or Jalasthanam. Ravi and
Kuja are fiery planet2, Buds is an earthy planet, Brihaspathi is an
ethereal planet and Sani is an airy planet. Therefore when Moon
or Sukra happens to be the lord of Lagna and has the «spect of
Guru or Buda, the body becomes stout. I have explained what is
meant by jalarasis. They are Meena, Kataka and Makara, and
when the Lord of Lagnaisin any one of these signs aspected or in
conjunction with good planets the body becomes stout. If the
Lagna falls in any of the houses owned by good planets, and its
lord has the aspect of Moon or Venus the person becomes stout. .
The aspecting of these combinations or Lagnas by evi: planets,

. takes away from the stoutness, and the person becomes medium
sized. If Jupiter occupies Lagna, he has a tendency to produce

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 99] =====
226 SABWABTHACHINTAMANI.

withered body and will be subjected to constant illhealth and
chronic complaints like piles, asthma, dispepsia, diabetes or gene-
ral debility. In the first half of the 222nd stanza Venkatesa has
used the word Nasa. Searching for its meaning, two interpreta-
tions are found and they are (1) Nasa means—the Sth house from
Lagna and (2) the twelfth house from Lagna. Nasa generally
means destruction or loss and we may well select the twelth house
instead of the 8th. ‘he general principle of bodily comfort is.
based upon the good position of the lord of birth and when he
occupies the 12th or house of loss from it this must necessarily
refer to loss of health or lossof the normal development of the
body. ‘The 6th, 8th and 12th houses are called Dusthanas or evil
houses, and if the lord of Lagna occupies any one of them, then
the siguification (Bhava) indicated by him viz body—must suffer.
But the word Nasa referring to the 8th house means loss of life
more than loss of normal development in the physical body and I.
humbly suggest that the word Nasa here may be taken to be the
12th house instead of the 8th. However my personal experience
has shown me that the body suffers much when its lord occupies the

th house also. Guru has been specially described as a stout planet
and if he occupies the Lagna, and if it fallsin a watery sign the
person becomes stout, and puts forward flesh rapidly. Venkatesa
describes combinations for leanness and after that he commences
with planetary conjunctions for corpulance or stoutness. Leanness
is less than normal bulk, and: stoutness is more than usual bulk,
If birth fails in jala rasi and good planets join or aspect it then the
body will 5e stout.

' मभ =
छप्राधिपर्तोयलगोवख्क्या स्तीम्यानवितशचैसनुष्टिमहुः
प्राधिपश्चज्जख्राशिसंस्थ इशुभ।न्वितस्तोयखोनदष्टः ॥

सगर दुभक्षेतगतेपिचैवं लमीश्वरस्थांशपतीजर्श् |

+"

पपिन्रह्ा्णाचहशाविने स्भेदकुभेक्षेतगतेपियैवं ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 100] =====
CoMBINATIONS FoR STOUTNEsS. 227

ख्मरेगुरौतननिरीक्षितेवा जरक्षगेणापिज्विरुपरे ।
सीम्यान्वितेशोभनवे चरैः द्णडेतवतिस्थौ्यमुदाहरंति ॥

Sranzas 224-225-226.

Ti the lord ag Laqna isa jalayruha, is strony and lus the con-
junetion of quod planets the body becomes stout: Tf the lora af Lagau
is in a jularasi, has conjunction with good planets, and has the
aspect of jalayrahas, and if Lagna falls in any houses ef the aus-
picivus planets, the person becomes stout. If the lord of the Nu caimsa
ovenpied by the lord of Lagna, joius a jalarasi, unaspected by evil
planets, and the fayna falls in an auspicious sign, then also the
person will become corpulent ov stout, If Guru oveupies Lugna or
aspects Tugna wheu he veceupies a jalarasi, it the Tagua jalis ina
jalarasi, or has the aspect of qood planets, or thetr conjunction, the

person becomes unusually stout.
NOTES.

Jalagrahas are two viz., Chundra and Sukra. (Moon acd Venus)
(see Brihat Jataka Ch. II. ver. 6), That these two planets are
watery globes are further illustrated by their becoming powerful
when they oceupy thefourth house or Jalasthanam. Ravi and
Kuja are fiery planets, Buda is an earthy planet, Brihaspathi is an
ethereal planet and Sani is an airy planet. Therefore when Moon
or Sukra happens to be the lord of Lagna and has the aspect of
Guru or Buda, the body becomes stout. Ihave explained what is
meant br jalarasis. They are Meena, Kataka and Makara, and
when the Lord of Lagnaisin any one of these signs aspected or in
conjunction with good planets the body becomes stout. If the
Lagna falls in any of the houses owned by good planets. and its
lord has the aspect of Moon or Venus the person beconies stout.
The aspecting of these combinations or Lagnas by evi planets,

, takes away from the stoutness, and the person becomes medium
sized. If Jupiter occupies Lagna, he has a tendency to produce

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 101] =====
298 SaARwARTHACHINTAMANT.

corpulance, and this stoutness will be unpleasantly increased when
he occupies a Jalarasi, when the Lagna falls in a watery sign and
when jupiter aspects that sign without evil conjunctions or aspects.
These combinations have been based upon some principles of
astrology. If Lagna is occupied by evil planets or aspected by
them, and it falls into an unwatery or dry sign then the body
becomes lean or emaciated. But when the Laguas falls in a watery
sion or the signs owned by benefies, and has good conjunction or
aspect and its lord occupies a watery sign then also the body be-
comes stout, and the extent of leanness or stontness has to be
judged by the strength or weakness of the planets, who aspect
or combine such Lagnas. Brihaspathi means a big planet and
when he occupies the Lagna the person will become stout.

ORS 2 ------
लत्रेशनौराहुयुतेथवारथा त्पिशाचतराधांपवदतिसैतः |
रत्ररविरभूमिपुतेनदृष्टः श्वाक्यंवि द्रधिगुल्मभाजं ॥

Stanza 227.

If Sani ov Rahu occupies Laqua, the person suffers fram* Devils
or evil spirits, If Layne is occupied by Ravi and has the aspect of
Kujt, the uutive suffers from asthma, consumption, enlargement of
spleen ov some disease in the ante.

NOTES.

Planets Sani and Rahu are the most powerful of the evil
ones, and exercise a great deal of influence in the bad direction
If Sani or Rahu ocepies Lagna the person suffers from evil spirits
or devils. Satan, devils, evil spirits, ghosts, hobooblins ete , are
not new names in the vocabulary of the world’s literature. ‘The
word Pisacha is used in the text and is thus derived in sanskrit.
* Pisitham Asnatht Itt Pisacha ” or those who have for their food

mamsa or flesh, hence evil spirits or devils are meant, As a trans.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 102] =====
Existence or Devits 229

lator I have simply to confine myself to what the author says in his
book, but as ascientific man, I will not be trespassing beyond my
bounds, if I made a short discussion on the question of the existence
or nonexistence of evil spirits. Man is considered to be a
compound of three states of existence, one within the other as it
were, and these are Sthulu, Sookshma and Karana or physical,
mental and ethereal. The last word is used for Karanam
because when finally analysed it will be found to be of the
essence of the Supreme Spirit or God. When death takes place
in aman separation ensiies between the body and that which
was mysteriously enclosed in the body and which actuated
it in all its external or phenomenal work. Jt would he
unreasonable to say that death annihilates all matter and leaves
no further traces of its future existence. If this proposition is
granted then birth simply means a sudden evolution of the
body and all its mysteries from unknown and unknowable causes,
and death means a sudden decompositicn or dissolution of all
that composed the inner and the outer man leaving no more for
the individual to aim at or work for. In fact the human exist-
ence in this ‘world, becomes purposeless and men may simply
engage themselves in the gratification of sensual pleasures, and
those gross propensities, which have made the world a stage,
which is fully convulsed with the ungodly passions of human
brutes. Those who have some intellectual strength and can
comprehend higher intellectual reasoning and those who
read carefully the Vedic literature of India, and the
religious works of other ancient nations, have always thought
that the mysteries in man are not easily solved, and that future
states of existence are not myths of deluded brains. Soul or
jeeva has been located in the body and at the time of death, a
separation takes place between the gross physical and the
finer spiritual. When therefore death occurs, the soul or men-
tal power with its actuating cause or Karma leaves the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 103] =====
230 SARWABTHACHINTAMANT.

body and goes away—by the laws of continuity-—to places
where it is attracted by its previous "good or bad Karma.
In the ordinary transactions of man’s daily life, his mind takes
him to societies where it finds pleasure. So also it is easy to
imagine that the same mental power when separated from the
body by death, will be attracted to regions or spaces where it has
its predisposition for attraction. The development of body is
mostly influenced by the development of the mind and
we see that the severe trials of a veal patriot or philanthropist
do not differ in their external devotion from those of hardened
dacoits or declared murderers. Both endure severe pains and
privations, and both work with a splendid determination. But
the mind of one is exercised in relieving the human
rniseries while the mind of the other is exercised in causing
them.

Attractions of the one cannot therefore be compared to the
attractions of the other. Here lies the grand secret of mental deve-
lopment, dependent upon a thousand and one causes, too numerous
to detail or even understand. After liberation from the body, the
mental state, whatever it may be, has its own peculiar flights into
the higher regions determined and directed by the previous trai-
ning it had while it was encased in the bodily surroundings.
The ancient Rishis prescribed methods for the development of
the body as well as the mind in such directions as would enable
the latter, when liberated by death, to take the approved path, so
that it may finally be thoroughly purified to make it fit to take its
place in the halo of the Supreme Intelligence and become on? with
It. This is no doubt ‘a very difficult question but its interest is so
absorbing that those who spend their time in studying it will be
amply repaid by a higher knowledge of man’s future existence.

An example or two will make this point clearer to the minds
of my readers. Suppose A. is a thoroughly good man, contented.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 104] =====
Karma ineuuences JBEvVA. 281

charitable, dutiful, godfearing, and honest, in his dealings.
Suppose B is as thoroughly a bad man, vicious, deceitful,
murderous, dishonest, discontented and greedy. 1o carry out
these two sets of principles both of them require certain
mental develepment, determination, intelligence and endurance.
The mind takes two different turns in these persons. While
the mind of a causes pleasure and profit to humanity that
of B causes pain and loss to mankind. When death approaches
these two individuals the feelings will be necessarily different. One
is contented and does not fear it, while the other takes altogether
different impressions. Death separates their bodies from their souls
and the flight of the two must be im opposite directions, because
their previous karma gives them attractions to regions which
afford congenial mental stages. Love, passion, hatred, vengeance,
avarice, self sacrifice, charity, duty, kindness, honesty, roguery
etc., raise different vibrations in the nervous centres, and the
activity of the brain cells, must therefore be in various directions
when one or the other of these are attracted by the surroundings
in a man’s life. Blackest thoughts corrupt the mind while the
purest thoughts purify it. I cannnot put the theory in a simpler
form. Mental power is the grandest force yet identified in nature
and, the intensity and the direction of it are determined by the
kind of feelings which are constantly harboured in it during its
tenancy in the body. The impure cannot join the pure and the
pure has no special attraction to the impure. Places of attraction
beyond the limits of the earth, must be so arranged as to afford
suitable planes for the existence of spirits according to the Karma
they have done when they tenanted the terrestrial forms.

When the mind force is thus ininer'sed or steeped in, avarice,
immorality, and vice of all kinds, the spirit which was encased
under such influences, will be called au evil spirit or devil and
when death takes place suddenly orby any of the accidents to

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 105] =====
232 SABWARTHACHINTAMANIs

which human bodies are subjected, the flight of the sparit
liberated from the body of such an unholy person, will be impeded.
in its higher directions, and as it has to be purified before it can
be elevated to join the saintly or holy spheres of existence, it will
have to move in the lower and unholy regions, and trouble people
who are peculiarly predisposed to its evil influences, and who
possess mentality similar to what the evil spirit commands. But
in the case of a god fearing and charitable man, the spirit takes a
higher flight unimpeded because the weight of grosser considera-
tions, does not shackle its movements, and ‘the attractions of
purer regions will afford facilities for its onward march. These
are called good spirits and they rise higher and higher, according
to the intensity of the mental feeling, they put forward in their
good Karma on the terrestrial plane. It is not easy to under-
stand the principles underlying these various attractions and
repuisions and states of devilish existence are ascribed even to
good persons when they commit suicide, or willfully take out
their lives by drowuing or falling from high places. Here we can
understand the reason why they will pass to good regions through
temporary states of devilish existence. When a man takes away
his life under a real or fancied grievance, he is discontented and
his mind is not in that mould which would fit the higher planes
of spirit existence. Suicide or Atma Hatya is considered even
worse than a murder, and must not be resorted to under any
circumstances. The rays of evil planets have evil influences
while the rays of benefics have good influences.

And when evil planets like Rahu or Sant oceupy the
Lagna, they have a powerful influence over the mind
of such a person, to attract or to be attracted by vice and
immorality and as the mind of such a person will be impure,
he will attract impure spirit already liberated from their
bodily conditions, but which will . be found hovering aboyt

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 106] =====
15

VAaninrins of Evi दाना. 33

unholy places. Haunted houses coutain evil spirits. They love
mischief and that was dus ty their previous treining. Some per-
sons see devils while others never seo them. There are three
Ganas.  Ducu—godly—Minesie human, and 14 "ना waged ly
or devilish. These are elassifiel azeorling to the Mobsters
persons are born in. The zoliacal, starry and planetary lights
determine these characteristics acd it would be a very
interesting study to pursue by the readers vf (115 bock.
Tt would therefore be absurd to deny the existengs of evil spirits
or the sufferings of those who are peeuiiarly subjected to their
influences. A man often catches cold hy the slightest variations
in the thermometer, while another do2s nor suffer iu the least bv the
largest variations in the atmosphere. When both of them meet, they
will be at loggerheads because (ne affirms the existence of an infln-
ence in the climate while the other denies it. We have te read a
great deal and think deeply on all these dificult problems in life.
It is silly to deny many things which we could not understand er
explain. These evil spirits are attracted by Sani and Rahul more
than by any other planets. Sani isa black planet. His color ab-
sorbs all other colours and reflects only darkuess. Ridau is eallod
Thamo graha or dark planet. He, as well as his ooposite friend
Kethu, gives rise tothe phenemena of eclipses. They obstruet
the solar and lunar rays and tuke away much of the terrestrial
energy. Darkness favours devils whi'e light dispels them. The
influence of darkness on the minds of bad men is simply indes-
cribable and many of the desperate deeds are committed under the
auspices of darkness. When God is devoutly worshipped, when
there is plenty of light, where men are honest, when they are up-
right and when they are guided by just principles of conduct, devils
have very little access and angelic spirits are evolved out of such
places. It is no wonder therefore that Sani, Rahu and Kethu, when
they occupy Lagna or aspect it with power, should subject the per-
son to the attractions of evil spirits. Their own rays are congenial
3५

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 107] =====
230 SaRWARTHACIUINTAMANI

my Astrological Magazine. Vols. I, IJ, and IV. They may be
read with great advantage by the sindent.

rat pe

म ^

भौतविख्भेशनिश्य दृष्टे लड़ाधिः पीडितदेहभाक्स्यात्‌ ।

= पश्चाच nae
केतौविचमरवहुपापदष्टे पिशाच चेरिमेवतिदवंस्यात्‌ ॥
Sranza 228,
TP Tangaet is oscapied by Mara aid the Sun and Saturn aspect it,
the person will be struck with weapons ele. If Kethu is in Tagna and

hus er asperis the man sefives froin theres and evil spirits.
NOTES.

Mars ocenpsing birth. when as sected by Satu and the Sun,
will produce injuries from weapons or sharp instruments, This
may result from the person falling upon them, cr his being cut
with them. It was already shosn that if Rahn and Sani occupied
Lagna, the man suffers from Devils. Lf Ketiiu is in birth and
evil planets—Saturn, Mars and the Sun-aspect him, the person
suffers from Devils. Large reading and careful discussion with
eminent men led me to examine the phenomena of the existence of
devils These ave called piswehus aud the word has already been
derived from the sanskrit root. Asin every othev case there are a
lot of imposters as against some genuine cases of cevil-tormenting,
Confronting some of the real cases, myself and friends watched the
phenomena with great interest and found some manifestations of
the power of the devil, which defied all scientific explanations or
reasonings based on our experience. An honest young woman

essed hard by mantras and
certain other performances, the devil said that it Would go. We

demanded some confirmatory evidence of the Devil’s statement
and the evil spirit said that a huge branch of a ficusreligiosa
( Peepul tree) which was in front of the house, would be broken and
it would disappear for ever. ‘he girl was almost in a dying condi-

was possessed of a devil, and when pr

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 108] =====
Davin DenonstRations 237

tion, and she was caught inthe hands of her father who was
really a strong man. She rose suddenly, made towards the door
and heavily fell on the floor making her father also fall
with a heavy thump. The peepul tree which was only about
10 or 20 yards from th: door where she fell with her
father, cracked, anda huge branch of it came down with a
tremendous crash on the other side. Vhe breaking down of the
branch and the falling of the girl with her father near tha door
were almost simultaneous and we were really puzzled at what had
happened before our very nose. The branch which was broken
by the invisible devil, was about 2 or 3 feet in diamete +, and could
not have been brought down even if ten eleshants had dragged it
with all their might, What surprised us most was that the devil
in the girl told those who were present there, that it weuld break a
tremendous branch of the peepul tree asa token cf its immense
power and that it would leave the gi-l ever afterwards. This was a
fact, as the girl got round, and become quite hale and healthy in
the course of a few days. I have seen two or 3 instances of such
remarkable exhibition of the presence of devils and their great
power aud I speak simply from my actual experience

In all these cases the time during which such sufferings come will
be generally the periods and subperiods of evil planets or benefies who
are weak and who are strongly affected by mulefic conjunctions,

Tn the following stanzas the author steps into other
considerations of how a person gets his money, whether he will be
prosperous in his own country or in foreign countries or partly
there and partly here-

लग्रे चेतद्‌ वनेश्वरेवा चरेस्थतेपसतचरति प्रज तः ।
सैचारशीटश्वरमेयिपने रां शकेचैवमुदहरंति ॥
Sranza 229, ।

Tf birth is movable, or if its lord oveupies a inovuble sign the per -

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 109] =====
238 SARWARTHACHINTAMAND

son will be a traveller. If the Navamsu of the Lagiiu be also tn chara
there will be a similay disposition.
NOTES.

The temper of the man depends upon the position of Lagna,
its lord and the position cf the Moon. The twelve Zediacal signs
are divided into Chara (Movable), Sthira (fixed) and Dwiswabhava
(common) (see notes P. 25) Mesha, Kataka, ‘hula and Makara
are Charas. Vrishabha and its quadrants ave Sthiras and Mithuna
and its Kendras are Dwidahas. If birth falls in a movable sign
the person will be inclined to travel, if the birth lord occupies a
movable sign, the inclination will be similar, If both of them
are in movable signs, then he becomes a great traveller. If the
Navamsa of the Lagna ischara, he will be fond of travelling.

पिद शभाग्धचरमेविलप्ने चरतदींशेचग्वेटदष्े।
स्िरेवेद शेवहुमाग्ययुक्त स्थर ्ररैपूिधनान्वितध्यात्‌ ॥

Sraxza 230.

[f the birth falls in chara, if its lurd oreupies a similar house,
aud if it has the aspect of planets im chara the person gets wealth
Trom foreign countries. If the Laqna is Sthira and has the aspect
of planets in Nthira houses the person becomes wealthy in his own

country. 10/11
ॐ

The words used area little dubious. We have nothing like
chara and sthira grahas, but as the velocities of the planets are
different a classification may safely be made. Between the Moon
who moves one sign in 2} days and Saturn who takes 900 days to
movein a sign there is a wide gulf, and Saturn may very con-
veniently be calleda Sthiragraka or stationary planet when com-
pared to the rapidly moving planet the Moon. In such a plane-
tary classification, Sani, Guru, Rau and Kethu, may fall under
sthiragrahas while the rest may be reckoned as charagrahas. But
Venkatasa apparently means that ifthe planets occupy a chara
Rasi, they get that influence and if they occupy a Sthirarasi they

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 110] =====
(५
‘OMBINATIONS FoR ‘I'RAVEL. 239

will be similarly influenced. Men generally get wealth from their
णी and when they involve large travelling, the Lagna,
its Navamsa and itslord must be in chara ; movable) and when all
these are in Sthira the person gets much wealthin his own native
| and travels very little outside. If these are in Jeiswabhara
the man will be partly travelling and partly stationary.

There is also another test which holds good in many ef the
horoscopes. Ifamanhas mans planets in chara he becomes 4
traveller. Jf many are in Sthira he becomes mostly stationary
and if they are in commcn signs then the,’ pruduce half travelling
and half stationary habits.

मिशरप्रस्तयुतभाग्यकौति ननापरदेरमरचरनूकुमाम ।
रत्नेशववीयुतेखतुने .ममीप्गामीपुरूषोन्यचास्यात्‌ ॥
Sranza 231.

If the birth falls in common sign, its lord ina similar house
and planets in @ common siyn ave aspectrig it, the person will gee
wealth from many countries, bué not always by honorable means.

If lord of Lagna is strong and join his Rouse of erallation, the
person will be very dignified in his behaviour,

NOTES.

Common signs ave Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces and
if birth falls in any one of them, its lord occupying one of these»
and planets inthese houses aspect it, the person will visit some
countries, make money aud acquire it in any way. That is, he will
not be very scrupulous about the means he employs in the acqui-
sition of his wealth.

दीनेतदौरेज दद्शुभैस्तु दृ्टयुतेवान तावि्ंतत्‌ ।
सननशुमेयोभनपृष्ठयुकत ब्राल्याचस्सुसतनदिपपयेगात्‌ ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 111] =====
240 SARWAE THACHINTAMAN

Sranza 242.

ZF the lord uf Layna is powerless, then the person becomes jada °
(Dull). If benesies aspect or foia with the birth lord, the person does
not. become dull. If agua is auspieluus and is combined with bene-
Jics ur has their aspect the person will have happiness from his
infancy, If evil plunets eumbine or aspeet there will be no happi-
ness.

NOTES.

If the lord of Lagna has not the sources of strength, detailed
in the earlier portions of this work, then the person becomes
dull or inactive. Te Guru, Sukra, full moon or powerful Buda as-
pect him or join with him, such dullness ought not to be pre-
dicted. If Lagna is auspitious—by this we have to understand
that it must fall in Dhanus, Meena, Vrishabha or Thula or in
Mithuna and Kanya, when Buda is powerful or in Karka when
Moon is full, and benefics aspect or combine Lagna, the man will
be happy from his infancy. This means that he will enjoy hap-
piness till hedies. Of course even in such cases when powerful evil
planetary periods intervene, they may cause occasional misery but.
he will be generally known as a happy man. Ifevil planets Ravi
Kuja, Sani, Ruhu, or Kethu occupy or aspect Lagna, the reverse
result must be predicted, that is, the man will be miserable. If
beneficial planetary periods intervene he may have occasional inter-
vals of happiness, but will be generally characterised as an un.
happy man. The general principle that benefies are good and
malefics are bad is well illustrated and the strength of Lagna and
its lord have great deal to do in the determination of happiness or

_ misery.

 

दुःसौमेतपापवरुत्वयोगे स्मेतुनास्यानरणान्तकार : ।
Stanza 232 A.

Tf there are many evil planets in the birth, the person becomes
miserable all through his life. i

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 112] =====
ComBINATIONS voR Misery. 24]

NOTES.

म , i

When evil planets occupy the Lagua, and have nu -beneficial,
180१088 176 person becomes sorrowtful in all his life, A distingtion
must be drawn between “a man of pusition and a man of joyful
temper.” Peeuniary or offivial position dues not always give the
man happiness. Shakespear's pithy remark thar “ uneasy lies
the head that wears a crown” and Johnsou’s observation that “in-
crease his riches and his peace destroy” ave well worth eontempla-
tion. ‘There are many men in very yuod means but they are always
miserable. ‘There are others in humble positis:u and thev are always
happy. ‘“Munaere Maaushyomein Kavanaw Baadhe Moksheitoha”

Mind can make.a heaven of a heli or u hell of a heaven.

Therefore happiness and inisery are qosthy ous can making
ead will affect us when our minds are eoutrelled by them, foat
when the mental strength is erent. pains and pleasures appenr no
more — Kivil vlaneta in the lagna which represents hody, tempera-
ment, health and appearauee— nuke a ian sorrowful and there-
fore miserabie. And this state will eontiene al) through the persen’s
life. Thave examined thonsunda of heroseones! and found that
When agua or Chuadra is in coajunetion with evil planets-Sani-
Ravi-Kuja, evil Buda, Rahu cr Kethu. the person will always
take a sorrovfui view of his nresent and fature lite. Ii there
area lerge ammber of evil planets in the laguna then ihe mind
of the persou will be very mel-achely. Take au example. Sup-
pose 2 man is born with Sani in lagna in exaltation in Thula,
He will be successful, commanding aid imperions, but be will be
miserable for one thing or other upsets the equilibrium of bis

remper.

Suppose a man is born in Aries with Saturn there, he willbe
miserable as well as pocorn. Take a birth in Cancer with Jupiter

init and take a birth in Capricorn with Jupiter there
3

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 113] =====
242 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

In Cancer he will be dignified, noble and jolly-tempered,
while in Capricorn the person will be ordinary and meanminded.

Suppose a birth falls in Taurus with Moon there in exalta-
tion and other combinations indicating poverty, then the indi-.
vidual will be jolly although he may be really poor. Suppose a per-
son is born with Chundra and Saniin Vrischika, and other comhi-
uations indicating great wealth, the person will be miserable
though he may be rich and influential. The distinction: bet-
ween a rich man and a happy man must be carefully remembered.
Planets are forming most pleasant and unpleasant conjunctions,
and the temperaments of the people depend upon how their lag-
nas are conjoined or aspected and apon the strength of the lord of
lagna. Dasas and Bhuktis bring in temporary pains and pleasures.

वर्गोत्तमांशोयदिलप्रनायेस्वाच्वांशकेवास्वसुहृद्‌ काणे |.
शुभान्वितेवाश्ुभद्ृष्टियाते नरोभवेदायरणाऽन्तस्सौर्यः ॥

Stanza 233.

If the lord of Lagua oenpies his Vargottamamsa, or his exalta-
tiuou Navamsa, or his awn or frien@s Drakkana, or if he joins a
benefic or has his aspect the person will be always happy.

NOTES.

Yenkatasa Daivagnya uow zives some combinations which
make a man alwars happy. Jf birth lord occupies Vargottama
Navamsa (see St, 14 ch. ]. Brihatjataka) or if birth lord occupies
that Navamsa in which he holds his exaltation, or if he is found
in his own Drakkana orin the Drakkaua of a friendly planet or if
he is in conjunction with a benefice or has a beneficial aspect
then a person born under such combinations will become a happy
man. This does not necessarily mean that he :will be a rich or
influential man, Those conditions depend upon other conjunc-
tions, and positions of planets, For happiness or? misery’ an

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 114] =====
COMBINATIONS For [TAPPINESS. 243

astrologer has to look carefully to the strength of the Airth lord
or his weakness and make predictious accordingly.

If a planet occupies Mesha, and he is also found in Mesha in
the Navamsa, he is said to be in Vargottamamsa. In all movable
signs, the first Navamsa, in all fixed signs the fifth Navamsa, in all
double-bodied or Dwiswabhava sigus the ninth Navamsa becumes
Vargottamamsa, This gives a special energy to the plane: and
hence he becomes beneticial.

When a sign is divided into 3 eyual divisions each is called
a Drakkana. If Gurn is foundin Meena or Danur !rakkana or
in Mesha, Kataka, Simba, or Vrischika Drakkanas which are own-
ed by his friends he becomes strung in giving happiness. If Ravi
is in Kumbha and Simha is I.agna, then the birthlord is unfaveur-
able and makesa man miserabie. But if this Ravi is in the
Navamsa of Mesha where heis exaited he becomes powerful aud in
spité of his weakness n the Rasi he yives happiness to the native,
because he occupies an exalted Navamsa. If this Ravi joins Guru
or Sukra or has their powerful aspect. then aiso he gives happiness
all through the person’s life.

In fact the guiding principle for determining happiness in all
life is the strength of the birthlord. Dasas and Bhukties may
come and go, and the person, if the, are bad, may suffer very sharply
but here the general disposition and condition of a man are given,
and they must not be confounded with temporary sorrows and
privations. Astrologers requirea good deal of intelligence and when
they omit any such important factors in their calculations they

‘aye liable to make mistakes and go wrong.

 

BUFTOAYTSTD ल्भश्वरेकेन्द्रमतिवरूब्ये ।
सि्ासनांश्याददेबवृन्ये जातोमेवेदमरणांतसतौख्यः ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 115] =====
246 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

those miserable states. If the 1st, 2nd and 8rd houses have bene-
ficial aspect or conjunction, if the lord of birth is a benefice and Sukra
occupies paravatamsa, the person wil! have happiness in the first
and middle periods of his existence. This means that he will not
be happy towards the end of his life. If birth Lord is a benefic,
and Sukra occupiesParavatamsa where have we got 3 more benefics
to occupy or aspect the Ist, 2nd and3rd houses. Guru, Chundraand
Buda are benefics besides Sukra. There may be aspects but there
cannot be occupations. The students should work out these in-
teresting propositions and satisfy themselves that my doubts raised
here are reasonable. When six vergas are combined in a planet it
is called a Paravatamsa. (See notes on P. 89.)
Veryas mean divisions.

बल्यिसुीस्पाह्प्दतेनद्रपूज्ये केनदरेयदारुपरपतंप्रंराब्यः ।
देरावतांसेयदि लमरनाधे स्त्रीपुत्रमीवाधंसुवान्वितोयम्‌ ॥

Sranza—236.

If Guru becomes powerful and occupies lagna kendra, and the
lord of lagna occupies Iravatamsa the person becomes happy from
the commencement

NOTES.

Of the benefies Guru is the most favourable and if he becomes
powerful and occupies lagna, and the lord of lagna occupies [rava-
tamsa, the man will be happy from the commencement. The word
used is Balya which meansin the young age. Having regard to
‘the excellent positions of the best benefic and the lord of lagna, I am
not prepared to infer that the word Balya means that the person
will be happy in the beginning and will not have it in the end.
_ It must be interpreted as meaning from the very beginning he. will
४९ happy. This cOmbination will rake a-man-cheertul and happy
all through his Life. ||| |॥|॥|||॥॥॥॥॥ ||| ||| ||| || ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 116] =====
Pains anp Prnasoegs. 247°

Travatamsa means the combiuation of nine vergas in a planet.
Very few planets combine in such a splendid way. (live Page 39.)
Such a combination will also give him wife, children, wealth and
friends. In the interpretati.n of these stanzas. I have largely fal-
len on my personal! experience asa reader. The compounding or
dividing a word may be very conveniently resorted to under the
rules of grammar and rhetoric in Sanskrit, but the question is will
such interpretations tally with the predictions and experiences of
the consultors. ‘he readers are requested to carefuliy uote these
important differences.

 

देवलोकं शमेषुक्रे लन्नेशेगोपुरांरगे ।
लपरडमप्रहैदष् भध्यान्तेसुखमाप्नुयात ॥
Sranza 237.

Tf Sukva ocenpies Derulukamsa, Lord of the Lntgaa  aecu pees
- Gopuramsa. anid Laud os uspected hy Deneties the person ill be
happy in the midile and end af his life.

NOTES.

For all these lmsas,1 request the reader to refer to my notes
on stanzas—32-38-3-4 aud 35 When four Vergas are combined it
ig called Gopyramss  Devalokamsa is a combination of seven
Vergas.

Sukra must occupy seven good Vergas, birth lord must occupy
four Vergas, and birth must be aspected by benetics to enable a
man-to live a happ; life in the“middle and end of his existence.
The stanza is simple enough.

 

लशे्मेधने पापेकेन्द्र पावस्तमन्पवेत |
SHR ATA चादीौदु; खंततस्सुखं ॥
Sranza 238

Lf fiaqna is occupied ly a henefic, the second by a malejic,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 117] =====
248° SARWARTHAOHINTAMANI,

mabefid occupies Kendra; and the lord of birth occupies. Oottamamsa,
the person’ will have misery inthe.beyinning and happiness afterwards.
1701 " ०. ।
` - (१06 88078, १8 very suggestive and ought to be carefully read.”
There must be a benefic in Lagna, the'second house from it
must ‘be combined by a malefic, an evil planet mustbe in a Kendra
andthe birth lord must have Oottamamsa, to enable a man to
have sorrow first and happiness afterwards. As Lagna. is the first:
Kendra and that must be occupied by a henefic, there are only
three more Kendras for evil planets to occupy. But here he means
only any one of thosa 3 Kendras to be occupied by Sani, Kuja. or
Ravi. Evil planets include also bad Buda, Kshina Chundra and
Rahn and Kethn. It would be enough therefore to satisfy the
conditions laid down here for avy one of these evil planets to
oecuny a Kendra. .Oottamamsa mean the combination of three
Vergas (See p. 39).

प्नेपपिधनेत्तम्ये भग्यिकश्विच्चभप्रर : ।
स्मरेशेद वलाकस्थवल्ये सौख्यमेतान्यथा ॥
Stanza 239. |
Ef inalefie oceupies Lagqna, a benetie in the 2nd, another in the
9th, and birthlord in Devalokumsa, the person enjoys happiness first

and sorrow afterwards,
NOTES.

An evil planet in birth, a good planet in the ond, and 9th,
and the lord of birth in the Devalokamsa will make a man enjoy
happiness in the earlier life and misery in the later days. This ia
due to the occupation of the Lagna by a malefic. He must show
his evil influence, and he does so in a striking mauner by subject-
ing the person to misery in his last days. TI have’ alteady pointed
out that we cannot imagine greater misery than the misery of:
suffering sorrow in the last days of a man’s career. :

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 118] =====
Goov hepuration. 249

SURHT TASTES |
सुमेदूपटेस्वतुगे बासत्की्िंल्भतेनरः ॥

Sranza 240,

Tf lord of Layna occupies 1th, and lord of Luth oveupies
Lagna, having beneficial aspects or overpying ecultations, the person

will have very goud reputation.
NOTES.

Reputation is often called a bvbble by the philosophers, and
they say that it is liable to burst atany moment. With due defer-
ence to their views, a worldly man cannot afford to have a bad re-
putation in the interests of his own success and business.

A good reputation can never be acyuired by a bad man and
even if by deceitful ways and means he acquires such a bubble
he will have the mortification of seeing it burst before his eyes
and perhaps it might even expose him to great degradation.
Clean character alone enables a man to get good and unsullied
reputation and this is certainly worth having at any cost. When
the lord of birth and tenth exchange their houses, having good as-
pects and occupying exaltations the results are highly satisfactory.
It is very curious that the author has used the word exaltations.
How can the two planets be exalted aud still occupy each other’s
houses namely, lstand 10th. Take Aries. Its lord is Kuja and the
lord of 10th Makara is Sani. Sani now must be in Mesha and Kuja
must be in Makara for his exaltation. Sani is in his debilitation.
Take Taurus. The lord is Sukra and the lord of 10th Kumbha is
Sani. If they exchange their places, there is no exaltation. Take
Gemini, Its lord is Buda, and the lord of 10th is Guru. They
exchange their places and Buda becomes Neecha in Meena while
Guru is only in Mithuna, Take Kataka. Chandra and Kuja ex-

change and Kuja becomes Neecha in Kataka.
88

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 119] =====
259 SARWARTHACBINTAMANL.

In Simha Ravi and Sukra exchange places and no exaltation
is obtained for either. In Kanya aud Meena there cannot be any
exchange between tivo planctsas the lords of both houses of Lagna
and 10th are oneand the same. Therefore the stanza has to be in-
terpreted in a limited sense. Jf any cne of the two, specially the lord
of Lagna occupies an exaltation, the person gets good reputation.

 

- ~~ --~~-~

पपिविरमरेशपतौत्रादौ केद्रभ्थितेकणिपापलेटे |
नीच म्रहेलपरेगतेकं इटेदुभ्कीतियुक्त स्शाभवेत्तदानीं ॥

Stanza. 2.11.

ff a maleyic uceupies Lagna, lordoy Navamsa lagna occupies Ken-
dra with Raku, a malefic joins tenth, and Neecha planet occupies Lag-
na, with the aspect of Ravi the person gets bad name.

NOTES.

The author gave in the previous verse combinations for good
reputation and in this he tells the readers when a man becomes
notorious or gets bad reputation.

There must be a malefic and asdebilitated planet in Lagna,
an evil planet must occupy the Karma or 10th house, the lord of

the Navamsa Lagna must join Rahu and occupy any of the other
two kendras—4th and 7th for he has given planetary positions for

Lagna and 10th, if these combinations are found in total with the
aspect of Ravi for the Lagna then the man achieves a name in the
wrong direction. He will be notorious and well known.

It is enough if there are evil planets in the 10th and Lagna to’
make a man notorious. 10th house is the most important in a.
horoscope and if this house of reputation is badly joined the per-

son gets an evil reputation, and if it is good: he'will be rightly.
famous

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 120] =====
Inepugnce pg LaGNa AND irs Worn. 25}

आसोहल्नेतुनिल्ननाये भाग्याधिपेताहशवीरययुक्ते ।
विख्यातकीतिं परनवोनरसतु शुभम्रहेणापिस्तमन्वितेस्यात्‌ ॥
Srangs. 242,

When lord of Lagua and 9th occupy the sirst hulres of lst and
9th houses vespectively with benesirs the person gets yrent reputativn-

NOTES.

The word Aruka and Arwulu are used to indicate ascending
and descending influences. The lula Lagua therefore will be the
end of the first half of the Lagna. Each of the Lagnas is divided
into 30 degrees and it may be conveniently denoted that the Lagna
or the planet in it willbe Avofa till it reaches the 15th degree and
then gets into the Avaroha state.

Therefore if the lord of Lagna is at the end ot the first half
of the Lagna, and the lord cf the {th is similarly situated there,
and these have the combination of benefics the persen will have a
splendid reputation and it will extend over a large extent of the
country. In all these cases it is clearly seen that for happiness or
health or reputation the lord of Lagna plays an important part
Aroha and Avaroha also mean states of planets moving toward§
Ooght and Neerha respectively,

आदौवय्तिघार्वारधे सौख्यंरमेभृगोस्ुते ।
दुःततुपरभागेच वंघौपापेपुतेतथा ॥
Stanza, 243.
If Sukra occupies the first half of the Leugua, the person has
happiness in the beginning. If Sulerw oveupies tke second half of Lag.

na, with evil planets in the Ath and 5th houses the person gets misery
in the end,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 121] =====
252 SARWARTHACHINTAMAN(.
NOTES.

The position of Sukra has a great deal todo with the happi-
ness or misery of a man, and the time is determined by Sukra
occupying the first or the second half of the Lagna. If evil planets
occupy the 4th and 5th houses, they make the man miserable in the
end with Sukra in the second half of the Lagna. Sukra represents
all worldly pleasures and it is natural that when he occupies a
favourable position, he will give the person happiness in the begin-
ning. 4th houserepresents happiness and 5th house intelligence
and children. Both these houses must also be well occupied.

x

कभ्नाधिपेङ्मयुतेयदितुंमभागे केद्वनिकोणतदितेङभटष्टयुक्ते ।
कर्मांपिपेनसहितेयदि चात्मगेहे सद्धाग्यकीतिं धनघान्यव्विरायुरेति ॥
Stanza. 244, PO IN oe Sh ete sady je. 9.803.
Ifthe lord of Lagua is combined with benefics, occupies his own
ewaltation, joius Kendrasor Thrikonas, has beneficial aspects combined
with the lord of 10th. or occupies his own house, the person will have
desirable wealth, good reputation, excellent surroundings, large
quantities of grain and long and happy life.

NOTES.

This seems to be a sort of summary of what the author Had
been trying to explain in the previous verses. What he insists
upon the astrological reader is that for long life, wealth, happiness
and good reputation, he has to principally consult the strength of
the Lagna and its lord.

Where this is neglected the predictions made with reference to
a horoscope may not turn out correct. If we examine into the
conditions of the lord of Lagna, all those which have been enu-
merated above will never be found combined in him. He may
be exalted but may not join with the lord of 10th. He may occu-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 122] =====
Importance of LaGNADHIPATAI. 253

py Kendras, but may not have exaltation. He may occupy his own

Thrikonas but he may not have beneficial aspects. To have long,
happy and peaceful life coupled with proper position and desir-

able children, the position of the Lagna, its lord, the oceupation
and conjunction of Guru and 'Sukra, have a great deal to do.
In the previous stanzas the author gradually opened his subject
and in this he sums up as it were the different positions, conjunc-
tions and aspects, the Lord of Lagna must have as wellas the real

beneficial planets. The extent of the good which may be expect-
ed from the planet depends upon the number of advantages he

possesses mentioned in this and the abvve stanzas.

रन्नाधिधेतिनल्वानद्ुभिरदष्ठः केद्रस्थतरश्चभलरगैरवरोक्यमानः |
मृयतिधूषविथधतिमुदौधेमायु स्सार्पगुणेहुमिर्‌जिततयाचलक्ष्या ॥

Stanza 245.

Ff the lord of Lagna is all powerful, has no evil aspects, occupies
kendras and has beneficial looks, he gets longevity. shakes off dangers,
possesses good character, will have personal yains. and secre a high
reputation.

NOTES.

This is a sort of continuation of the previous thread of in-
struction the astrological adepts have been giving.

The conditions laid down are that the lord of Lagna must be
all powerful, he must be occupying any one of the Kendras, he
must have no aspects from malefics, and he must have the aspects
of beneficial planets. Thus the essence of the instructions is to
see primarily the sources of strength possessed by the Lagnathi-
pathi, and this is a very valuable stanza to remember in ths con-
sultation of Balaristajatakas or the horoscopes of children who

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 123] =====
४.५ SARWARTH ACHINTAMANI.

have cxitical times .in their younger days. Bala-Arista means,
yonng-misfortunes, oy evils which happen to children when they
are young. Lam surprised to see this stanza quoted by Battot-
pala in his commentaries on Bribatjataka in the Balaristadhayaya
Chap. VI. A very difficult question arises as to the authorship
of this sloka Bhattotpala eompleted his invaluable commeutaries
on Brihatjataka on the panchami oth day of the bright half of the
lunar month Chaitra in the year 888 of Saka on a Thursday.” The
suka certainly refers to the era of Salivahana and therefore this
learned commentator was in the prime of life about 937 \ears ago.
This will bring us to the year 965 and 66 A. D. If this verse
was composed by any other astrological writer, it is possible to
imagine that the commentator took itand quoted it as an authority
on the point under illustration. In the: commentaries to Br.
Jataka he clearly says that he is going to quote some valuable
passages from Anyarha, yas or other learned writers on Arista
Bhanga or combinations which goa great deal to avert the evils
indicated by Balarista ang prolong the life of the children thus
afflicted by evil influences, 9 be quoted by this learned Astro-
loger, tho stanza must have been taken from some renowned
writer for whom Bhattotpala must have had certainly a great
regard. If Venkatasa ig the author of it then he must have lived
before Bhattotpala or at least must have been his learned contem-
porary. This takes Venteatasa to the 10th century A.’ D. or even

earlier thau that. It is Possibe that this stanza, which must have

been composed by a learned astrological writer, might have been

copied by the anthor of Sapwarthachintamani, and incorporated in

foto into his work, ashe gould not change it for better and as
it contained too valuabe an information, to be omitted by
instead of confusing myself and my readers with unnecessary:
chronological difficulties 1 simply point out to my readers

the possibility “of ‘its ° existence long before Bhattotpala and

him

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 124] =====
Times of ENJoyMENt. 255

quoted by him in his commentaries Venkatasa Daivagnia is
certainly not so old ax one thousand years, and if Bhattotphala
knew him by name, he would certainly have mentioned his name
in his immortal commentaries ou Brihatjataka. Jf we refer to
Valmiki and Vy*sa,twoof the most rencwned epic writers in
India a remarkable coincidence happens. Valmikiis certainly the
older of the two and the Ramayana is call-d the Adikavyw and
never disputed by any sensible and reputed writer. In his Adityw
Hridayu in Bharata Vyasa almost repeats, some of the verses
composed by Valmiki in his Aditya Hridaya in Ramayana in toto.
This is as it should be. Some versés are so fine that wheu a sub-
Sequeut, author cannot improve them, and cannot at the same time
omit them, he falls into the 2nd alternative of quoting them in
full as if composed by himself for the occasion.

To inherit money is not considered so noble ag to earn it by
honest means, The combination above given is a good one and
gives man energy and facilities to earn wealth by his own exertions.

 

केद्रतिकोणनिधनेषुनयस्वपापा रप्नाविस्सुरगुरश्रचतुष्टयस्तौ |

=

भुक्तव।सुखानविघधापेस्तचण्यकमी जीवे चवत्सर शते सविमुक्तरोग : ॥
Sranza 246,

Tf evil planets ave not in Kendras, Thrikonas and in the 8th house,
and the lord of Lagna and Jupiter oceupy Kendras, the person will
have all enjoyments. will be charitable, and virtuous, will be free
from disease and will live wp to one hundred years-

NOTES.

It will be observed from this’stanza what amount of strength
a man getsif only the birth lordand Brihaspati occupy Kendras—
1st, 4th, 7th, and 10th houses. The verse says that evil planets

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 125] =====
256 SaBWARTHACHINTAMANI.

are not required to be in the kendras, and 5th, 9th and 8th houses
when kendras and Thrikonas are free from evil influences as well
as the Sth house, which signifies length of life-Auyurbhava and if
the lord of birth as well as Jupiter occupy Kendras then the man
will have every enjoyment and long life and prosperity. Lord of
Lagna and Guru may be in one and the same Kendra or each of
them may occupy different kendras. Any how the authorities in
astrology seem to insist upon the lord of birth using in any one
of the quadrants as well as the most beneficial planet Guru.

shia खपरेशस्यांशपेपिवा ।
तथाध्यितेटामनावे विंशद्रषौत्वरसुती ॥

Stanza 247.

If lhe lord of Lagnay or tf the lord of the Amsa, occupied by the
lord of Lagna, or the lord of the 11th, occupies the Ind house the
person gets happy after his 20th year.

NOTES.

Here three different combinations are given. The lord of
Lagna niust occupy the 2nd. The Lord of the Amsa occupied by
the Lord of Lagna must occupy the 2na. The Lord of the 11th
or Labha (gains) must occupy the 2nd. Jn all these cases the
person becomes happy after he is 20 years. This implies that he
will not be happy before that age. Here Amsa means Navamsa. Sup-
pose Mesha is Lagna. Its lord is Kuja, and he may be found
occupying the Navamsa of Thula. The second combination is that .

this lord of Thula. Sukra must be found occupying the 2nd house |
or Vrishabha.

|
मेशस्थांशनधेतुकेद्र स्वक्षो चसेयुते ।

खभेशेवातथामूते तिंशद्रषीत्परंसुली ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 126] =====
५

ComBINATIONS ror Havringss. 267
STANZA 248.

Tf the lord of the Navamsa ovcupied by the lord of birth or the
lord of the 11th, occupies kendras, his own house, or his evaltation,
the person becomes happy after his 30th year.

| NOTES.

Here times of happiness are roughly iudicated without re-
ference to periods and sub-periods of planets or the Gochara. The
lord of the Lagna must occupy scme Navamsa asa matter of
course. ‘hen the lord of that Navamsa occupied by the birth
lord must be found out, andif he occupies his own house, anv one of
the Kendras, or his house of exaltation, then the pe-son becomes
happy after he is 30 years. The latter portion is easy. If the lord
of the 11th occupies his own house, any one of ihe Kendras, or
his house of exaltation, the person becomes happy after 30 years.
In all these cases Venkatesa hints that the man will not be happy
before the periods mentioned here.

But suppose in such a case, the person gets a very bright
Dasa of a planet in his 20th year, and the temporary movements
of the planets are also very favourable to him. The result will

he a tug of war between the general influences fixed at the time

of birth and those influences which come to him later cn. Here
itis meant that when such counteracting influences work ina
horoscope, the results will not be as bright as when no disturbing
elements are observed. Suppose in such-a horoseupe good Dasas
come after the 30th year, then the period will be brighter than
what the planet indicates, Herein lies the skill of the astrologer
and he must take all facts into consideration and balance the evi-

dence before him.

 

रभेशे्भराशिस्थे शुमेशसुत्षयुते ।
गोपुरंशगतेवापि षोड़ शाब्द (प्पःसुी ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 127] =====
258 SARWABIHACHINTAMANL
Stanza. 249.

Tf the lord of Lagna occupies the 9th house, or the lord of the 9th
decnpies the Sth house or is found in his (opuraiusa the person will
command happiness after his 16th year.

NOTES.

The occupation of Yth by the lord of the birth is good, as
also when the lord of the 9th occupies the 5th. If both or one
of them occupy the Gopuramsa, then it will also be good. for the
person. In all these cases the man gets happiness after his 16th
year. his will be a very desirable conjunction: There is another
reading which means that the lord of Lagna must be in the 9th
with beneficial aspects or occupying his (Gopuramsa, ‘his is also
good and may be retained.

nN

ग्रहयो गेक्षण।भ्यांतु बलव्रलव्शादपि ।
wane श्रीमर्ेकटरश्मणा ॥
Sranza. 250.
The results of planetary conjunctions, aspects, their various

sources of power as bearing upon the Lagna (birth) have been de-
tailed by Venkateswara Sharma.

NOTES.

Venkatasa mentions his own name at the conclusion of this
chapter and says that he has carefully explained the résults of
planetary conjunctions, their aspects and the various. sources of
strength of the planets so far as they directly concern the birth
and its various significations. In all these cases significations or
Bhavas run into each other, and cannot be treated exclusively by
themselves. Happiness includes health and children, money and
power. |||

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 128] =====
Comatnations ror WEALTH. 959

Life includes good and bad and can never be found unalloyed
in its nature. Education includes influence and money. Life in-
cludes happiness and misery. Iarning money may involve vari-
ous Bhavas. But still each Bhava istreated separately as far as
practicable, and this is what he means. The mentioning of his
name in this as well asin other chapters makes the authorship of
Venkatasa quite certain, and he is both « learned as well asa
lucid writer. He has grasped the principles of astrology well, has
a good command over the language and has the genius to express
his thoughts and ideas in brief but lucid style.

End of chapter IT.

CHAPTER ITI.

My

टु द्रक्तव्यंमुखच वाग्दक्षिणाक्षिपृतर्थान्‌ ।

ss

चःनुभुक्तिविशषानु विद्यामतलप्रभेदं च ॥

oh

Stanza 25]

From the second house has to be found family, jaev, speech,
right eye, precious properties, varieties of food, eductitions aud digfers
ent Mantras.

NOTES.

Venkatasa after detailing all combinations affecting the
Lagna or body etc., now intends tv take his reader through the
various significations or Bharas and naturally he comes to give a
description of what are signified by the 2nd house. and what con.
junctions and aspects will give prosperity or adversity to them
Lagna is always counted as the first and therefore the second
house means the next from it. As many are liahle to make mis-
takes in these matters, I shall give one or two examples. If

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 129] =====
260“ SARWARTAACHINTAMANI.

Misha is birth sien then it is Lagna and is technically called the
first house in a heroscope. The second from that will be Vrisha
bha, and the third will be Mithuna and so on. Vrishaba from
Mesha is second and Mithuna from Mesh is third.

Mantras are a series of sound vibrations so arranged as to
produce definite results. ‘Therefore second house enables one to
see what Mantras the person will get initiation in and with what
effect. Face, right eye, speech, general family and the different
kinds of food the man will like, have to be judged by. the 2nd
house, its lord and the planets who cccupy and aspect it. The
details will be given further on.

रश्नेश्वलणसहि तोयदिविच्तनायोदुस्थोक्षि नाशन माथस्मुनिरदुयुक्ते ।
नेतरे श्रेतनुगतेयदिनैकशकोधः स्वोचेशुभग्र दयुतेनतयाविधंतु ॥

Stanza 252

If the lord of the 2nd joins the birth lord and orcupies Dusthanas:
there will be luss af sight. Ifthe lord of the second joins Sula and
Chundra and occupies Logua with them, the person will have defective
sight duriny the night. If the lord of the secund is exalted or is com-
Lined with another benejic there will be no defect as yredicted above.

NOTES.

The conjunction of the lord of the second with the birth lord
and their occupation of Dusthanas—6th, 8th and 12th is bad for
vision: If the lord of the second house joins Chundra and Sukra
without exaltation (for lord of 2nd house) and without beneficial
conjunctions the person will’ have defective vision during the
night. But if a benefic joins them this defect should not be

. predicted. In the above comibination the person will have good
sight during the day.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 130] =====
Burnpness rrom Birra. 261

~

भानौचलम्रपतिनासदिते तदीश्ेजायंधकोमवतिरधषडंयगेःपि |
रिप्फेधरमुत गतेनयनंहिवामं नासंतदात्रनतिसूर्सुतेतदन्यत्‌ ॥
Stanza 253

_£f the Sun joins the lord of birth, and the lord of the second hap-
pens to oceupy 6th, 8th or 12th houses, the person becomes born
blind. If Mars occupies 12th the left eye will suffers and if Saturn
occupies the 12th, the right eye will suffer.

NOTES.

The conjunction cf the lord of birth with the Sun and the occu-
pation of Dusthanas by the lord of the 2nd will denote total Joss
of sight from the birth. The Sun seems to play an important part
in giving strength to the sight orin depriving it.  Dusthanas--6-
8-12 are bad forany planet or Bhavadhipath: to occupy.

If Mars occupies 12th the left eye and if Saturn occupies [kth
house the right eye will be affected. If in the above combination
there are beneficial conjunctions or aspects the persen will not
suffer much. In the Vedas the Sun and Moon are represented as
the two eyes of the Supreme Intelligence and their strength in a
horoscpe determines to a large extent the strength of the eyes
of a person.

` चद करसेयुक्तरवीदु चतरे शन्यारदु्ोक्षतिनाशमाहुः ।
डमाञुैवुहुदलोचनस्स्याचमेनदोषस्सहितक्षणाम्यम ॥

Sranza 254.

If the Sun ant. Moon combine and occupy ( “ancer or Leo— (their
own signs) having the aspect of Mars and Saturn the loss of sight oc-
curs. If there is an admixture 0; malefic and benefice aspects, the
person will have defective sight. If benefics join ur aspect there is

no evil to sight.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 131] =====
262° SAR WARTHACHINTAMANI.

NOTES.

Kataka and Simha are the houses of Chundra and Ravi res-
pectively. Surya and Chundra represent the two eyes. If they
join together and occupy any one cf the above signs, having Mar-
tian or Saturnine aspects then the person suffers from loss of sight.
Tf these combinations have beneficial aspects then the sight will be
defective. Budbudakshn means, one whose sight is watery, and
defective and one who cannot see properly but at the same
time he is not perfectly blind. Jf benefics aspect the conjunction
of the Sun and Moon and their occupation of Kataka or Simha,
the evil to sight shonld not be predicted. ‘This means that the
person will not. be born. blind, but will lose it later on.

निमीलितक्षस्तुधनेप्तपपे तदीश्वरेशौभनद्‌ युक्तं ।
कप्नापिप्रपापनहुत्याग यनदुटततुनततसमः ॥

Stanza 258.

If there is un eril planet inthe 2nd and its lord is aspected
by benefics the person rill have Nimilithaksha. If in this conjunc-
tion, the lord of Lagna is combined with many evil planets aud as-

pected by Saturn, the person will have eye disease,

NOTES.

From blindness the author takes his readers to half blind and
eye diseases. Nimilithaksha means half opened eyes or eyes pos-
sessing only half sight. This differs from combinations for eye
diseases. The second house must be occupied by an evil planet,
and when the lord of the second has beneficial aspects this resnIt
occurs. There are some who cannot fully open their eyes and
therefore cannot see properly. If that combination is aspected by
Sani then he will have eve complaints. [f in this combination, the
lord of Lagna is in conjunction with evil planets, aspected by Sani,
then there will be eye complaints

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 132] =====
Ixnenoence oF Bista Lorp. 263

In all cases of planetary conjunctions, the strength of the lord
of Lagna and the aspect he possesses have a great dealto do in the
direction of influencing the native. ‘the birth lord has a general
influence which modifies, augments, or neutralises the influences
exercised by the lords of {the various other houses, and this must
be carefully borne in mind in venturing predictions by an astro-
loger. In the latter case above enumerated, there must be an evil
planet in the 2nd having beneficial aspects, and the lord of Lagna
must be combined with many evil planets and in addition have
the aspect of Sani to cause eye complaints.

In all these cases, the presence and aspects of benefics ought
not to be overlooked as they have the power «f modifying or miti-
gating evil influences tu a very large extent.

जलान्वितेकरकखचरेनद्रेनेञे शुभेतद्वनेश्वरैव। ।
सौभ्यान्वित कारकसेचरेनदरे ल््रश्वरेणापियुतेथदृ्टे ॥

(विशारटृष्टिस्सनयेविशेषा च्छन्यारयोगेगुच्िकेन युक्ते ।
नत्रेश्वरस्थांडपतैौसपीपे पापप्रहेक्षेत्रगतेतयेब ॥

नेनाधिषेवासतस्नाधकेतु धरासुरवीगुव्ठकाकिदृष्ट |
उण्णोद्धवेनद्यथ पित्तकति नैत्रस्यरोगैर्भवतिप्रमादः ॥

Sranzas. 2536—257—-258.

Tf the Karaka of eyes is powerful, if the 2nd is occupied by a
benefic, if the lord of the 2nd is combined with a good planet
or if the lord of the birth is joined or aspected by the Netra Karaka
the person will have broad and beautiful eyes. 256.

If the 2nd or its lord combine with Kuja, Sani and Gulika there
will be eye disease.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 133] =====
5 bers

964 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 2nd house,
joins an evil planet and the 4th house is occupied by another malefic

the person will suffer from eye diseases. 257.

If the lord of the second joins Ravi, Kuja and Kethu, and has °
the aspest of Sani and Gulika, the person will suffer seriously from
eye diseases cuused by great heat, biliousness and jaundice, or some
other severe bodily complaints. 258.

NOTES.

“Survandrianam Nayanam Pradhanam” is a sanscrit expression
which means that of all the senses, the most important is the
sight. Here there is a double interpretation. By developed sight
man can overcome all desires which may be generated in his
mind by the sense attractions. ‘Chis sight is the gnana chakshu of
the yogis. ‘This is the internal meaning. Externally, it is easily
seen that the most important sense is the sight and it must be pre-
served at any cost. How useful this will be for doctors to know
in their professional work, if they only studied astrology. and at-
tended to its invaluable suggestions. They do not know exactly
why the eyes suffer at all, and they can never say at what period
the person will suffer from bodily complaints. Astrology will
throw a flood of light on these circumstances and it will be worth
their while to devote a little attention to this all absorbing study-
There is no need to say that sight is an important factor in the
life and career of man. A blind man is thrown into the greatest
disadvantage by want of sight combinations Therefore predictions
which deal with the organs of vision are to be carefully noted.

| ४९ Karaka or lord of eyes is the Sun as given out by Venka-
tasa at the end of this work, ‘There are some other astrologers
who consider that Nethra Karakas are two planets, the Sun and the
Avon dnd thet the right eye is under the control of the Sun while
ihe left is under that of the Moon. But as Venkatasa.- gives the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 134] =====
fo अद.) च
(0 =
(0111035 ror ६४ (0 133. 265
weep ee
control of both the eyes to the sun. the Karaka here must be
interpreted as the planet Ravi. HINO IAN el ave
se
owe per eo

The principles underlying in these combinations seem to be the
position sf the lord of the 2ud,the occupation of that house by bene-
fics, the conjunction its lord will have with auspicious planets and
the aspects both the lord aud the house may cummand. In these cases
‘the eyes will be full and strong. When evil planets aspect or oceupy
2nd house or cumbine with its lord and aspect him and when the
sun is not powerful, and has maletic conjunctions or aspects, the
person will have eye diseases varying in intensity with the strength

of cvil planets, and producing good when benefies are powerful.

The lord cf the 2ud must not occupy evil positions viz , 6th,
Stu and 12th houses f-om Lagna. If -ukra oecupies the 2nd he use
he will vive charming eyes. When evil influences predominate to
a large extent, the person might even ivse his sight altogether. All
these combinations, presume that the man has sight at the time of
birth, and will lose it afterwards. ‘he times duriug which such
sight will be lost or endangered, will be times cf evil planets, who
get jurisdiction cver the vision during their periods and sub-periods.
‘he determination of the causes for compiaint or loss of sight, will
depend upon the characteristics of the planets,who control the visi- -
on at the particular time. Thus if Kuja is in the 2nd with evil as-
soviations the sight may suffer from fire, bile, heat, or sudden
dangers or instruments. If Sani is similarly situated,the causes may
be traced to windy complaints what are familiarly known as Pata-
Raj as and so forth. Planetary peculiarities are clearly sketched
out in the first chapter of this work, and no reader can hope to be
successful as a predictor, without mastering the details given in the
preliminary chapters.

Inthe Aristadhyaya of Brihatjataka several combinations are
given’ for loss of sight, and they may be compared with the present
notes with eréat. advantage.

34

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 135] =====
“pete
26६. SaRWARTHACHINTAMANT.

-. The lord of the Ind house must occupy seme Navamsa is &
matter of course and if the lord of that Asa joins an evil planct,
and the 4th house is occupied by a malefic, powerful disorders in
the sight must be predicted.

Jaundice, when unchecked will produce loss of sight or dim-
ness in vision by the increase of bile. Excessive sexual indulgence
will take away the visual vitality and subject the person to $ 10115
eye and other bodily diseases-

mene

अभ्याजः ्रोर्नयनस्यसेग स्तव्थसानपेदुस्थगतेनक्तौम्य । -
सहोदरात्मो द्वच धु शत्‌ कल्छतपुत्रादि भवेत्तयैव ॥
रयादयुक्तेसतिनैवनाध द्ृ्टेतुता््यांनय नाऽन्तरक्तः ।

सौम्यग्रहौ करकभावनाथौ दटवोस्युमंह्यच्छुभदटियुक्तो ॥
31५५४48 \254---00.

If the lord of the 2nd being eril uccupies 6th, 8th, aud Leth house.
there will be eye complaints without ustensible causes. Sunilar signifi-
ratious must be predicted for brothers, children, yelativius, enemies

and wives. 259-

If the lotd of the Ond is combined with or aspected by ‘Ravi and
Kuja, the ends of the eye will be colored red. If the lord of the Qnd and
the Karako. for eyes are uspicious and they have beneficial aspects the
eyes of Lhe ६८८५५ will be strong and fair. 260.

NOTES.

The word Dusthana used in the work means 6th, 8th, and 12th
houses. ‘he occupation of these houses by any planets will give
them evil influences. Many of the complaints can be traced to some
immediate or remote causes. But there are jet others, which have
to be traced to causes arising 1D the previous births. ‘This is a Strong
argument in favour of the Karma Theory, without which it is nut

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 136] =====
ComBinaTion FOR EYE ComrLAINTs. 267

possible to explain satisfactorily all the inequalities in position,
education, health, mental capacity, moral tone and pecuniary success
which are witnessed among men. When the lord of the 2nd is in con-
junction with Ravi or Kuja the eyes will be colored red at their ends.

Both of these are hot and fiery planets and they slow a sort
of reddishness at the ends of the eyes of a person When the lord
of the 2nd and the NetraNarala have beneficial aspects or conjunc-
tions, the vision will be strong and distinet.

Venkatasa givesa very valuable suggestion ax io certain peculi-
arities in a horoscope aud how to judge of a man’s euemies, relations,
children, brothersand friends. When a horosco:e is examined there
are 12 Bhacas or signifieations. which Lave already been exolained
inthe previous chapter. 7 he first shows the body cf the person, the
second his family and vision in general, the third indieates brothers,
the fourth mother, the fifth children, the sixth enemies, the seventh
wife, the eighth longevity, the Qrh father, the tenth re,utation.
the eleventh elderbo n brothers aid sisters. and the 12th sin and
heaven. What Venkatasa me: ns to say here is, that if the weifare
uf the brothers of a person, has to be consulted, then the 3rd house
must be taken as the birth of his brothers and making it as their
Lagna, the astrolozer has to pre dict their suceesses and failures.

Oneor twoillustrations will make his meaning clear.

Yake the f llowing horoscope —

Vhe eyes of this person, have ee
: ॥ Moon
; Rahn :
the lord of the 2nd as well as its | iy | I ॥

aecupants and those which send

 

to be jndgel by the strength cf . Lagna. Satum. |

“Jupiter:
‘Merenry:

 

powerful and beneficial influences. © San 7,
॥ ॥ coe Rast diagram " --- ---- `

If the nature of his brothers has t Cupri- fa leading: mat |
to be found ont,then according to. corn. | | ;
Venkatesa take 16 दत्‌ क्ट ; 1 |

| | ५।।॥ ||
Cancer which represents brothers | yenns | : लीप |

| ॥

i

: . Mars. |
and make this the Lagna or birth

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 137] =====
268 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

time of his brothers. Then the ond from Cancer, and the conjune-
tions there and with its lord will decide as to the sight of his
brothers. Their education has to be judged by the fourth house
from Kataka. The 9th from Lagna or Capricornus indicates
father, piety &c, and that must be taken as the Lagna of his
father. The sixth house represents his enemies. This house vit
Thula will represent the Lagna for determining his enemies’

future prospects.

The 4th or Leo represents mother and this will be the Lazna
of his mother. In this way every other Bhava has to be carefully
examined. There are 12 Bhavas or significations from the Lagna.
If we want to know the results of any one of ‘these Bhavas with
reference to the person whose horoscope has to be examined, we
must take them in the detailed order from his birth sign. Suppose
the morality of a person is wanted. Fourth house represents it,

Tf the 4th from Lagna is taken, then its examination reveals the
nature of morality which the person possesses. Bat suppose
his father’s morality is wanted. Then the 9th from Lagna
represents the father of the man. The 4th from the 9th or the
10th from the Lagna really represents his father’s morality. Further
gub-divisions of these will represent the different brothers, sons,

sisters, friends and wives.

 

पापग्रहाणामधदृष्टियोगा त्पिलादि कानां फलमेवमाहुः ।
कुटुम्बरशेरदि पस्तसौम्यः केन्द्रस्तितस्वोरुहद्रदेवा ॥

७८५
सौम्यरकषयुक्तोयदि नातपुण्य कुदुरसंरक्षणवाग्विभूति ; ।
लोचस्थितेशोभनवेचरेन्र टुत शौञमवीक्षितिवा ॥

Sranzas 261—262- |

If the lord of the 8nd and Netrakaraka have evil conjunctions oy |
aspects the vision will be defective. These significations have to
be extended to father &r., —261, nil

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 138] =====
Commasp oF Rusrret. 269

If the lord of the 2nd joing a Lenafic, and occupies hentras,
ewaltations, friendly houses, or the signs of benesics, the person will hedp
his family members, ane will hare sweet speech for all. If the lord
of the 2nd joins auspicious planets similar results will follow there-
from. 262

NOTES.
The first part of the staiza has already been exp'ained.

Venkatsa takes the reader to thos: plaaetary combinations,
which influence persons to command respect amoag their relations
and castemen and family members in gensral. Charity should begin
at home. There are some persons who entertain bitter feelings to-
wards their family members, and who are kindly to strangers There
are others who do a great deal to help their family members Na-
tional as well asreligious codes, have ordained that men should help
their families first and their societies and nations efterw rds. If
they neg'ect this simple but most essential duty then they will never
become worthy before their God = The lord of the 2nd_ represents
family & and when he is good and oceupics kendra: 1-4-7-10, his
own house, his friendly signs, his signs of exaltation, or the signs
of benefics, he will make the man leve his family and support its
members as fur as he can. The houses of real benefies are Taurus
and Libra ruled by Venus and Sagittarius and Tisces governed

y the most auspicious planct Jupiter Vhe houses of Mercury,
namely Gemine and Virzo mayor may not be considered good
as he happens to be good or evil by occupation and association.
Mercury as is we!l known is an unsteady planet and becomes good
or evil as he is conjoined. The house of Moon is good when he is
full and inauspicious when he is weak.

अनेकसंरक्षणजातपुण्यो लग्नश्वरेवीययुतेस्वतु

छ ७

गुरौकुटूबेस्वपतौयदि प्यादुगौ बुद तादु शभावनायं ॥

a

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 139] =====
"970 SAuWARTHACHINTAMANI.

स्वोचपुहुस्षेतरगतेथ भौ परोपकारीजनरक्तकस्स्यात्‌ |
पामतुतद्माशिपतौतदानींपपेक्षिते पापयत्तुड ॥

way

रुते श्वरेदीननलेस पापे खजीवनोवगायसह। यकेन ।

क्षिति

पपिबहुवेतुकुटुजराशौ पपिक्षतेदीनबख्तदीश्चे ॥
दुस्येविलनाथिपतौसपपे स्वजीवनं नस्थितवेनतस्प ।
पताकुटुबस्यतुृतीयरा्ञौ स्थितयदौपुप्रहसौम्यदृष्टे,॥

Sranzas. 263, 264, 265, 266

Tf the lord of Lagna is in exaltation and also the lord of the Qud.
and hace beneficial aspects, the person will be charitable and, helpful
to many. If Guru is the lord uf the second aud occupies it, or the 2nd is
viened by Buda or Sukra and they ocenpy their exaltations or friendly
houses or occupy the 4th house, the person will protect many and be
helpful to the public, 263.

if the lord of the Qad is evil, aud has evil conjunchons or aspects
and is evalted, und the lord of birth is weak and conjoins a malefic, the

verson makes his money or livelihood by helpiag others 264,

Tf ewl plauets occupy the Quad, and its weak lord is aspected by
maletics, and if the lord of Layuais in conjunction with evil planets in

the Dusthanas the person makes a hard living, 265

Tf the lord of the second is aspected by Jnpiter occupying the 3rd
house, and if the exalted sun vecuples the 4th house, the person will
be u protector of many persons. 206.

NCTES.

The lords of the tst and 2nd houses must be exalted with
beneficial aspects, to make the person charitable. When jupiter
occupies the 2nd and owns it also, the person becomes helpful to
others. If the 2nd is owned by Venus or Mercury, and they have

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 140] =====
Livetinvop ann Livixe ५7}

exaltations or if they join friendly houses the man becomes a sup-
porter of many souls. ‘hese were all beneticial combinations. Now
the reader is taken to the evil conjuuetions which the author
details. Jf the lord of the 2nd is exalted, is evil and has evil २३) ८८1§
or conjunctions, the person will help others and in the bargain gain
Some money. This may refer w all such persons who are called
Commission agents, brokers and Dalals. Ot course their success
depends upon the stren gth of the lord of the 2nd and those who join
or aspect him. When evil planets occupy the 2nd, when its lord is
weak and is aspected by malefies, and when the lord of the Lagna
occupies Dusthanas or bth, Sth and luth, the struggle for existence
will be severe and he knows little of happizess. When the lord
of the 2nd is aspected by Jupiter, who vccupies the 3rd house from
Lagna and when the sun in exaltation occupies the fourth house.
the charities of the person will be immense, and he protects many,
4 careful study of these combinations enables one to judve whether
a given horoscope will! be successful or unsuccessful and whether the
person will be helpful and public spirited or whether he will earu
money to leave wealth to those who come behind him. Earning is
quite different from spending aud spending is quite different from
carefully using money for his own as well as for the benefit of his
fellow subjects. The difficult nature of the astrological predictions
must have been brought before the readers of this work and I have
to insist upon the students, to carefully read these combinations
analyse them, digest them, and then venture on future predictions.

पुखस्थितेखेचरनायकेत स्वतुड्गेप्रैन नाध्वनेश : ।
सवो्तिकोणायगते कूटबराशेःपतौरुपनपतौवरद्ये ।
कटुनाधस्थितराशेनये केनद्रेतदासवैजनावनेश : ॥
तन्नाथेगोपरंशस्थेक्टुं बस्यां श्रमे ।
 सिद्यसनांशकेवापि पञ्चाशज्जनरक्षकः ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 141] =====
279 SARWARTH ACHINTAMANL

द्वितीयैपपराशिस्थे aoagaaieg |
पापत्रहणदृषटदु्ष टेनचजीवनम्‌ ॥

Svanzas 267—268—269

Ff the lord of the 2nd is exalted or found in 5th, 9th or L1th,
with the lord. of birth powerful, and the lurd of the sign occupied by -
the lord of the 2nd in Kendras, the person will be master and: pro-
tector of many persons, 267.

If the lord of the 2nd occupies gopuramsa, or Simhasunamsa or
if the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 2nd happens
to be a benefic, the person will protect 50 persons. 268.

a Tf the 2nd house is owned by a malefic and tf dts lord ocewpies an
fevtl sign and has eul aspects, the person will have very hard life. 269.
ue वि
NOTES.

The exaltation of the lord of the 2nd house; or his occupation
of the 5th, 1)th,and 9th houses, with the lord of birth powerful,will
give man position and wealth to protect many.. The: power of the
birth lord. means; that he must be well posited, well. combined, well)
aspected, and well occupying the shubha shadvergas. This is ver-:*
important. If the lord of the sign occupied by. the lord of the Ora”
is found iw the Kendras, the person will protect many persone 2h,..7

In the horoscope above given, the lord of the 2nd is Mereury”
and he occupies Kumbha. The lord of Kumbha is Saturn and
he is found in the 2nd house. Butt if Saturn hed o¢cupied Kend-
ras then the person would: have been a- protector of many persons.

Stanza 268 isi not clear; amd. the imterpretation on its face
would be found finconsistent. Perhaps. what. the ‘author mesnt
was that if the lord of the 2nd occupies Gopura or,Simhasanamsa
or if the lord of the 2nd occupies a beneficial Navamea, the man

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 142] =====
Miserapie Lrvrne. 273

becomes a protector of 50 persons. This means that through bis
earnings, about 50 persons will be supported and this cannot be
done unless the man has a decent position or wealth. It would
be unintelligible to consider that the 2nd house can occupy any
Navamsa. It may be construed as meaning the 2nd Navamsa
from the Lagna. From these good combinations Venkatasa will
now take the readers through those combinations, which make
man’s life difficult, and his career full of obstacles.

If the 2nd house happens to belong to a malefic, if the lord of
the 2nd occupies an evil sign and if he has evil aspects, then the
person will have very severe struggle for existence. He earns
little, and that little comes to him after great trouble and anxiety.
The ways of the world are mysterious. Why one man should he
easily successful, while the other is unsuccessful, nobody car
clearly explain. The Karma theory offers very convincing argu-
ments in this direction. But even Karma Theory is found to be
difficult to understand. Why there should have been differences
in temperament at the very commencement of creation to attract
good and evil influences, is a question the solution to which is not
so easy to give. Any how there are very great differences in the
mental capacities of created beings and their moral perceptions
sre simply marvellous. All these differences could not have

ni‘ean the products of blind chance. Neither ean any nan definitely
to. -avhat is chance’ We see certain laws holding good. It is
the mind that is a good or bad conductor for virtues and vices.
When this mind leaves the body and goes away to higher or
lower regions according to its previcus Karma it must necessarily
८४८५८ with it its »revious encumbrances, and these in course of
tim: must be expactel to produce their own good or evil results.
Th? qnestion is a very complicated one, but at the same time, the
most interesting one in this world to study and understand.
Actioius must inevitably produce some results, and all causes must

have their corresponding effects. Sore are quick in producing
85

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 143] =====
274 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

results, while others take a very long tine,

canso without its diress or indirect elect

hus it will be sean that some men sueceed very ed

others tike a long time to achieve success.” There are yet others |

who never are successinl. ‘These effects are indicated by the
combinations of planets at the time of birth, as well as by the new
angles and positions which those planets assume in their incessant
movements round their axes as well as round other planetary
spheres. Granting that men pos<ess similar capacities, we find
that the results of their actions when performed under equal
conditions will greatly vary and these therefore clearly show that
the present actions and their results have some close relationship

with the previous states of existence of the person. Otherwise our

attempts must be uniformly successful when directed under simi- °

lar conditions. Man is a grand mystery and his relations with

But there ean 06 10

| ॥ ||| १
sily while |

objective and subjective phenomena are .peculiar and require

deep knowledge to understand. »%s man brings some invisille
but all the same, certain energies with him from his previous

states of existence, these add a great deal to make or mar his for- -

tunes in this life.

विंशतेस्तवर्ीस्पात्कुटुे रेङुवैर्युते ।
पाएवतांशकेतस्मिन्‌ धनेचेद्रसर्मान्वते ॥

स्वोचसहदध स्वगहेतदीशे सिंहा प्तनेतदु वने श्ववा ।
७ ८

पारव्तशशिगुह दष्टियुक्तं -शतत्रयंशात्ततेन तिक ॥ ||| |||

gers Sargeras | |
त॒द्राविधेतद्धवनेापजातः पतदखसरक्तषणपुण्धभक्स्यात्‌ ॥ `
सेहासनांशेविद श द्रपूज्ये शुक्रेषदागोपुरतंगुतेतु ।
रेरानवांशेषनपेनराव्ये जातस्लसद्ुयाजनर्षकस्स्यात्‌ ॥ , .

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 144] =====
Protecting FELLow SUBJECTS AND THEIR NUMRER- 275

उथजीवन्तितंसतदौे गेपुरांशगे ।
वर्ध्तमुदि 5 स्ति जगुरौ तवतांशमे ॥
नान्तिचेद्रानयेःशस्तु पुरस्कृयनरननाः ।
उपसीतन्तितनाये पाराततगतेतय। ॥

Sranzas 71-71-71 ४ ,

Thao ts ia 04 Dab faxes oF lie second Bherva veer pee
Pararulamss and if the lovd of the Lad coajotus ॥" Ue beneiies the pers

son will protec? 200 persons S70,

Tf the lovd of the Quad occu pins eodltudiut, (1147 1/3 ५ des ou
house, ov sihastadusds while ihe lord of the honse were the Lad
honse omer stops, 711, 71111181 1११1 the

person will protect BO poojde, = 2. 1.

If the lord of the Sand cecpies lis soca aul has aspect hy or
vonjunetion with Cina, while there is a planet “ ८ Surache १५ the @nd
unth jueian aspect ar conjaned ou the persad will Ponda and prose

feet one thausand sails, Qele

[fda piter Uren pues 11/11 1111717. 1100 aud iy
the lord of the Budd ts poorer tid 10 7071 1/1 1 the person

will protec! pitnebecless arene LOD.

Pt the lard of fhe Qa ove ples (9111, (18 banat 11111.
Puravataiuisa, dug persons Lire comfortably through lis tnjluence

und dependency.  2e 4,

Ii the (| uf the 9nd enaidyes teith Vararataasd, although the

person hus no Lajayoyd, natn yy pers ies will wake their Ueetthoot and

yed on well by depeudiaig pou iin aud vespeeliny ५८८. 1०.
NOTES.

"The stitazas are Very interesting. Mone, is the great aim of
roavy of the people. Before its influenca, othr iaflaenoas are al-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 145] =====
||

Yet (
most insignificant and powerless. A mind that is greedy after

money will entertain no scruples in the means used to acquire
it. When the Lagna and Bhava Sputas are made, the 12 houses,
will be found to be occupying some good or bad vergas or divi-
sions. Venkatasa means to say that as Lagna has born, Drakkana,
Navamsa, Dwadasamsa, Thrimsamsa and Shastiamsa so also have
other Bhavas their Shubha or Ashuba Vergas or good and evil
divisions. ‘I'hese can be found out by correct mathematical caleu-
lations. There must be moon in the 2nd house, the second
Bhava must fall in Paravatamsa and the lord of the 2nd house
must be found to be in conjunction with benefics, to make a person
protec:or of 20 persons. ‘his means that directly or indirectly he
governs 20 souls and they will depend upon him fortheir mainte-
nance. This number so correctly stated need not be taken literally
but must be interpreted in a general sense. ‘hen Venkatasa —

SanwaBTHACHINTAMANI

gives a combination which enablesa man to protect 300 souls.
The lord of the second must,occupy his own house, a friendly sign
or the sign of his exaltation, or occupy Simhasanamsa, while the
lord of the house where we find the lord of the 2nd posited
should be in Paravatamsa to create the yoga above referred to.
‘I'he lord of the 2nd may be exalted in his own house, then that
becomes his house of occupation and he is his own lord. Even
in this case 1 think he must occupy paravatamsa to generate this
yoga where he will be in a position to protect 800 persons. ‘hen
we come to Swocha, (See Stanza 30. P. 87).

There must be a deeply exalted planet in the 2nd, while its
lord must also have deep exaltation and beth of these must have
the aspect of or conjunction with J upiter to enable a person to
protect a thousand souls. A person will certainly be a great man
on whom one thousand people are directly dependent for their
livelihood.

Then a higher combination is given; wherein the individual
have wealth and influence to protect numberless men. ” The last

i ॥ BRA | Bee Bates Maybe Tae rk

ae d 1 #244

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 146] =====
Provgcnne FELLOW. StBsEcrs AND THEIR Numner. 277

(7 mn taken in its literal sense. While the population

given in definite numbers, numberless does really
mean greater than that number. What the- auther apparently
means is that a very very large number of souls depend directly
upon this great man. Guru and Sukra have to occupy Simhasana ~
and Gopuramsas respectively while the powerful lord of the second
must occupy Travatamsa to make aman elected-as the head of
some large numbers of people, to enable them to make a comfort-
able living on his dependency. There are heads of various socie-
ties and institutions. A religious community may elect 2 man as
their head and then through the earnings which that position
commands all these may make their living, as some sort of
dependents upon him and his position. Here the people give him
a position and then take advantage of that position for eking out
their existence. [

Then comes an equally goud combination. Lord of the 2nd
in Paravatamsa, will enable a person to get into a position whereby
he will be the means to procure livelihood for many persons al-
though he may have no Rajayoga- ‘Rajayoga may.refer to political
position under the direct control of the ruling-Government. But
there are some employments which are at the mft as it were of
the people themselves, which they can give and urder the shadow
of which they can spend luxurious and-comfortable. lives.

॥॥॥॥॥॥॥॥॥ || ||| ||| । || ।

मुतेशोकन्मानस्वे भग्रइनिरीकषिते ।
मुखेसौम्ययुतैवाप पुपृखस्सनरोभनेत्‌ ॥
भरुर्मद नः शनान्मे मुख पतौक्तति | |
सोचचमित्रसतवरगश्ये तनयिगोपुरांशगे ॥ |||
परिषृतेमुस्थानि हनायेपावलंयुते । = NIMC
नौचराशिगतिमापि दुसैलःपापनीकिते ॥ ML

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-2 | PDF page 147] =====
278. ˆ ति 11 1१1 1 (1 (0
` ४४8. 276, 277, 278

If the lord of the Qnd oecupies keudras axpected by १८९८९ or 11
a denefic occupies the Qad, the person will hace « haudsene or attrace
tive fuce. 276.

If the loved of the 2nd aveupies kendras, exaltations, friendly
houses, or his own Verges, ov if the lord of the house occupied by the
lord of the 2nd orcupies Gopuramsa, the person will have « full face
and much wealth, 277.

Tf malefics oreupy the 2nd or its lord is debilitated or joius exit
planets or has ecil aspects the perso will have an ugly or repulse
fare, 278.

NOTES.

The second house represents face. Combinations-are explain-
ed by Venkatasa Daivagriya, to illustrate the various kinds of
faces. ‘There are some who possess very inviting faces, while |
there are others who have absolutely repulsive looks. If.the lord.
of the 2nd occupies Kendras, his friendly houses, his house of
exaltation, has beneficial conjunctions or aspects, then the as:rolo-
ger is advised to predict good faze, fully developed and possess-
ing an attractive appearance. If the lord of the 2nd is well situated, |
then the person will also have riches... There are some who-
are very bandsome, but who have no invney, while there ave
others who are positively ugly but who command immense
wealth. In these cases a distinction bas to he made: The lord
of weaith is different from the lord of the house signifying wealth
2nd is the house of wealth and its lord nay be any one of the
seven planets who govern all terrestrial affairs. Lut the Jord ‘of
wealth is Jupiter and according to some ‘Mars. For: personél
appearances we have to take the lord of the tstas well us the lord'uf
the 2nd. When the 2nd house is occupied or aspected by good
planets, the person shoald have great wealth, bub ii these vlanets

