Sarvartha Chintamani (Part 1) (1899) - Venkatesha
Translator: B. Suryanarain Row | Coverage: PARTIAL: this scan of the 1899 edition ends around chapter 1 stanza 146 (2nd house); it is NOT the full house-by-house work
Cite as (slug, PDF page). Verify against the page image before trusting a rule.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 1] =====
- श्री i
सवाथचितामानि

ARWARTHACHINTAMANI

WITH ORIGINAL TEXT IN DEVANAGAR
Lara ese
ENGLISH JRANSLATION
WISE CQRIOGS NOTES AND GZEGSTEATIONS
Br
B.SURYANARAIN ROW, B. A., M. R. A. S.
Member Of The Asiatic Society Of Bengal,
EDITOR OF THER ASTEOLOGICAL MKAGEZINE,
Granslator of the JAEAHACHGNAGIEA, Author of the
Astrological Self gns¥ructor,
AsPROLOGICAL PRIMER,
SHORT COMPENDIUM OF ASTROLOGY,
REVIVAL OF ASTROLOGY,
VIKARI AND ITS PROSPECTS,
Lave EDITOR OF THE Mapras Arcus. ¢
Ete. Ete. Ete.

First Edition, 1000 Copies,

 

Printep aT THE ARYAN Press, Be.iary,
By P. Ramanan Narpvu, Proprietor.
1899.

All rights reserved.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 2] =====
Sri

Faye te 1/1)

Sarvarthachintamani is a splendid work on horoscopy or
phalabhaga of joytishasastra and is very important on that account
ax furnishing means for man to know his past, present and future.
The English translation of this work which extends over 2,000
stanzas in original sanskrit, and the notes and illustrations I have
offered, will speak for themselves. The original text is given in
Devanagari character and in some copies in Telugu characters for
the convenience of those who do not understand Devanagari, so
that the readers will have the special advantage of comparing the
different readings of the various texts) and the English translation
given by me. Any furthur doubts and difficulties are intended to
be cleared by the elaborate notes and illustrations given by me
and the readers are earnestly requested to go through them care-
fully whenever they find any difficulty in understanding the texts
In the translation ofa large and technical sanskrit work like
Sarvarthachintamant, itis possible to find passages which may
not haye been very correctly rendered into English, or whose
spirit might not have been properly represented in the same invi-
ting form as it has been done in the original text. Readers have
to understand the several difficulties which stand in the way of a
translator and realise them before they venture to offer their cri-
ticism. English language is not sanskrit, and sanskrit is not
English. Without crying down this or that language about its
relative merits, 1 may safely say that the idioms of the one lan-
guage cannot be easily rendered into the idioms of the other and
in many cases they cannot be satisfactorily translated at all.
Various causes have contributed to these difficulties and they
are further increased in the facb that competency in English,
sanskrit and technical sciences has not often been found in.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 3] =====
it INTRODUCTION.

one and the same individual as each branch of the know-
ledge requires a lifelong study for itself. And any rendering
of the one into the other in the absence of such a happy and
rare combination of several branches of learning in one person
will but lead to many misrepresentations and mistakes.
Helps to the study and understanding of these technical bran-
ches of knowledge are not forthcoming, while ideas relating to
astrology are very few and inadequate in the English langua-
ge compared with what we possess in the original sanskrit,
Che flexibility of sanskrit has been a great stumbling block in the
way of rightly understanding the technical words,and the extensive-
ness of its Tuntras and Mantras, Sustras and Puranas, Medicine
und Astrology, Rituals and Morals, Vedas and Vedangas adds con-
siderable difficulties in the same line and makes any comprehensive
intellect to reel back from the difficult task which lies before him. A
tew words may be quoted here to illustrate what Imean. Take the
word Soumya in sanskrit. That which is born of Soma is Soumya.
Soma is Chundra and Soumya therefore means Buda who is said
io be the son of Chundra. But sowmya also means Shubagrahas
ur benefics a3 opposed to Papagrahas or malefies. A third inter-
pretation for soumya is good or mild as opposed to Krura or wild
or eruel, Sometimes in stanzas which contain the word Soumya
there is great difficulty in giving the proper interpretation, for
besides Gurt and Sukra, Buda is also classified as a Soumya
yraha (good planet) under certain circumstances. Vakra is an-
ither word which has been well described in the astrologi-
cal works. Vakra is one of the many names given: to Kuja
“ev Mars. Vakra also means the state of any planet—Kuja,
Buda, Guru, Sukra, and Sani when he is retrograde or in
us backward motion. The result sometimes so happens that
ither interpretation will suit the context and either may perhaps
~upport the prediction. In the expression Vakram Hitva or Vena
it may mean without Kuja or without a planet who isin his re-
trograde movement. The word Papam is applied to the 8th as
well as the 12th houses and also means a malefic planet. Instances
vf such doubtful expressions which are capable of various inter-
pretations can be multiplied by scores but these few words given

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 4] =====
INTRODUCTION. IIT

here will show the nature of the difficulties which a translator of
a sanskrit work has to meet in the progress of his work. In some
cases the names of the planets are indicative of the results which
they are supposed to give, and they are very aptly used in the
sanskrit language which can never be imitated in the English
or any other foreign tongue. The word Satwika, refers to two
states, one physical and the other mental. A man who possesses
great physical energy is called a Satwika, one who has much
Satwa (strength); or a person who possesses Satwaguna or
pious disposition. The Three principal characteristics of the
mind are Satwa, Raja and Thama, as they are classified in the
Aryan philosophical works. In the expression Satwam Kujaha,
it may be possible to offer both the interpretations and both look
plausible enough in connection with certain passages. Kuja re-
presents according to some authors Satwaguna and also commands
exuberance of physical energy. Buda means one who gives
Buddz or mind and he controls wisdom as he is represented to be
the planet who gives gnanandriyu (consciousness of self) to the
otherwise unconscious faetus in the seventh month of its exis-
tence in the mother’s womb. Guru means, preceptor, big and
planet Jupiter. Sukra means, seminal fluid, whiteness and planet
Venus. Sani means, blackness, slowness and the planet Saturn.
Rooksha means a constellation as well as a sign of the zodiac.
Rahu is called Thame and it means shadow or the junction of the
two forces emanating from the Sun and the earth. I have only
attempted to give a few out of the many meanings which these
words have in sanskrit, and these names are always used in their
proper places to indicate the results which are likely to flow from
the name of the planet in particular. There is a good deal of diffi-
culty ina work of translation to reproduce faithfully what the
original author wants to convey in his own impressive and admi-
rable style. Those who have got a good insight into the difficult
. languages they are handling will readily realize the responsibility
which rests on them as translators. Translation means the inter-
pretation put upon the author by the translator and not the ori-
giaal forcible expression of the author, which may be interpreted
- in altogether a different way, by a clever student if he were allowed

,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 5] =====
iv INTRODUCTION,

to examine the original text for himself If therefore the work of
translation is carelessly done the science and the original authors
suffer a good deal. This will, [ believe, be a good cause for anxiety
for all right thinking men on whom rests the responsibility of ren-
dering useful books from one language into another. Very few
realise their position as translators, and know the mischievous con-
Sequences which flow to the world from their incapacity and care-
lessness. These, therefore, are not imaginary difficulties which
might be passed off ag mythological, by the intelligent interpretors
of the original sanskrit works, There is yet another difficulty
Which stares me in the face and which cannot be slighted. - Astro-
logy ig necessarily a science intended for the guidance of man both
in his temporal and also in his spiritual affairs, Conceptions of
temporal and spiritual ideas are essentially different in the langua-
ges of English and Sanskrit, and they have sprung up quite dis-
tinctly in the two countries of England and India under different
religious, moral, social, political and physical conditions, India
labours rightly or wrongly ander the belief that she has almost
forgotten her ancient civilisation, and that her present children are
mere pigmies when compared to the intellectual giants who tenan-
ted her happyregions formerly, while England labours undertheidea,
that she has reached the acme of civilisation and that her present
SOUS are 80 many intellectual giants when compared to the bar-
barous pigmies who tenanted her wild regions in the former times,
The Aryan civilisation is essentially spiritual while the English is
mostly temporal, Here then lies the grand difference in thought
and actin between the two languages we haye to deal with, and
[ have to draw the Special attention of my readers ta this singular
but nane the less important fact, English is a progressive lang-
uage and has great ambition to assimilate useful ideas which may
be found in the foreign languages, But in sanskrit the pretentions
are of the highest kind and the language strictly forbids intrusion
of any kind from the foreign languages which are considered her
Progeny, taking sap from her for their existence, but never lending
anything worthy to her. If success is to be Secured in transla-
tions of sanskrit works into English or any other language the
best way would be to use the original sanskrit word for which

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 6] =====
INTRODUGTION. 7

there may not be correct English equivalent. But these difficul-
ties should not be allowed to obstruct our intellectual progress.
Educated Hindus must make an attempt however unsuccessful it
may be at present—to overcome such difficulties, and I am one
of the many who are labouring in this field of research and trans-
lation, Many new words have been eoined in the English lang-
uage, and I do not see why any person should be kept back from
inaking such attempts, simply by the fear of being unjustly criti-
cised if he is otherwise capable and competent. Another difficulty
is equally unsolvable. It is the technical nature of the science of
astrology I have undertaken to reproduce in English. English
Astrology seems to have been entirely borrowed from the Greek
and Arabian astronomers and these in their turn appear to have
borrowed it from the land of the Vedas where all knowledge flou-
trished before the dawn of western history. In this double transport
and travel English Astrology appears to have lost a good deal of its
previous foree and usefulness which it possessed in the original
sanskrit. Arabians, Persians, Chaldeans and Greeks who borrowed
astrology from the Maharishis of 4ryawartha did so under special
disadvantages of alien language and religion, and astrology appa-
rently lost a good deal of its original value in this process of bor-
rowing by nations differing from the Aryans in religion and
language, National and religious differences therefore had a great
deal to do with the degeneration which astrology as a science
underwent at the hands of the foreign scholars who came to the land
of the Vedas to drink in at the very fountain head of knowledge :
and when this deteriorated system of astrology travelled into the
uncongenial and barbarous regions of Western Europe, it was strip-
ped of a good deal of its ornamentation and orginal value. This
noble and most complicated of all sciences had to be presented to
the rude nations of Europe in a form comprehensible to their stin-
ted intellectual attainments. We know, as a matter of fact, that
the western nations of Europe were almost without education one
or two thousand years ago. Their priests, who monopolised all the
learning of their lands, were men of very ordinary intellects, and
they were not in a position to understand properly the eomplica-
~ ted formulas of the astrological sciences. The high mathematica]

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 7] =====
VI INTRODUCTION.

proficiency which is expected in an astrological adept was comple-
tely absent in them, and their ignorance of the various branches of
learning which are helps to the study of astrology was against their
understanding it properly. The Karma Theory so difficult to under-
stand was the stepping stone to astrological information and the re-
medial portions so abundantly found in theHindu astrological works
were completely left out for want of proper representation. A tho-
rough insight into these various branches of knowledge alone could
have made the astrological studies intelligible, and this was too
much to be taken in by those simple priests of the Western Europe,
who never rose high in the intellectual sphere, and to whom all
these complications meant nothing but utter mental confusion.
Even unto this day the same difficulties stare the Western Nations
in their faces, in spite of the wonderful progress they have made ia
the arts of civilisation. Whenever any references are made to
Mani, Mantra, and Oushadhies they at once reject the whole science
us false savouring too much of superstition and clashing with the
dvclared principles of the Modern Sciences. N obody knows exactly
what sczenee means now a days, but every one talks of modern
५८१०१२८८ as if it is the easiest thing for one to know in this world.
The medical man talks of his noble science ag much as the cobbler
of his science of shoemaking; the lawyer swears to the perfection
of his legal science while the chemist proclaims from the top
of his voice in regard to the infallible nature of his science.
The astronomer is of course a declared a scientist, while the
castronomer 18 equally certain of the rules of his noble science.
Photography isa science as much as orthography. But when
we pin these worthies to the errors and contradictions found
therein they attribute them to mistakes of calculations. The
predictive portion of astrology is even more difficult than
the rest of astrology for any one to understand: and in the
comprehending of these rules the western nations showed a
complete failure, Astrological interpretations in a foreign lan-
guage, especially in English are no easy work for any man to
undertake ; they are much more so for a man who has clearly the
defects of the English language before him, and whois at the same
tine conscious of the extensive nature of the sanskrit idioms,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 8] =====
INTRODUCTION. Vit

I have already grown lengthy about the difficulties attending the
translations of original sanskrit works into English and only re-
quest the readers of these pages to be a little more indulgent in
judging of the merits of a work of this nature which I have un-
dertaken to translate in spite of these obstacles. I have freely
used sanskrit expressions wherever I found difficulty in selecting
an appropriate English word, and this I hope, prevented me from
falling into as many errorsin my translation, as otherwise I
should have been guilty of The pronunciation of the sanskrit
words is another difficulty. However nicely the spelling may be
modified the pronunciation at once tells its own tale and affects
the construction which may be put upon the sentence or part of
the sentence, which we wish to produce in our work.

I shall now introduce the readers to the work of the auther
Venkatesa Daavagna who appears to have compiled the Sarvar-
thachintamani from the best works which were available during
his time. The selection he has made—without pretending any
originality—is a monument of his patience and diligence, and makes
him one of the best compilers in the field of astrological research.
Joytisha is saidto comprise Thriskanda or three grand divisions
and they are Ganitha (mathematics) or Astronomy, Phalabhage
(predictions) or Judicial Astrology, and Prasna (questions) or
Horary Astrology. Marriages and other ceremonies may be sepa-
rately termed a section of Astrology called Moohoortha or may be
conveniently joined under the 2nd division. These several divisions
are equally important to the astrological reader and cannot be
omitted by him if really he means to have a general proficiency. I
do not mean to offer any praise to one branch at the cost of the
ether two. Phalabhaga is the most important for a man to know
and as man has tried, since his creation, every means in his power
to read the future of his life, my attempts to place such means as
would easily enable him to know this much desired information
will not certainly be unacceptable or uninteresting. Feeling this
satisfaction in my innermost heart I now desire the ‘reader to fol-
low me carefully into the contents of the Introduction where he
would realize how far I have wasted my time or used it to the
begt advantage possible, In the Introuction to the tradnslation

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 9] =====
VIII INTRODUCTION

of a great work like the Serwarthachtntamant I shall not attempt
to argue the pros and cons for a belief in the science of Astrology
or to defend its cause when so much has already been said or
written about it by me and by others competent to deal with it from
an intimate knowledge init. The justification for the study of
Astrological books remains entirely on their own intrinsic value,
and the practical uses to which the astrological principles may be
advantageously applied. The stability of the modern scientific
theories has been very often questioned and many of these theo-
ries may be exploded at any time. I have shown at considerable
length the reasons which prompted me to believe in Astrology,
the work I have done, and the success which attended my attempts
in the region of practical predictions in the Introduction to my
Astrological Self Instructor and Primer and also in the several
leaders and sub-leaders which have appeared from time to time in
the Astrological Magazine conducted by me. I request my rea-
ders to kindly refer to the publications above alluded to and I am
sure they will find there ample food for contemplative and logical
minds. Verkatusa Daivagna opens the work with a Mangala
Sluka as all Aryar authors do with a sincere invocation to hig
family Diety, his Guru, Goddess of Learning Saraswathi, Gana-
pathy the Diety who removes all obstacles, Mesha and other
Zudiacal signs, Ravi and the most important planets, and all
those (persons) who have in any way been benefactors to the
world. In the last sentence he refers to all Maharishis and As-
trulogieal writers who have done so much to benefit the world by
their splendid publications and it may also include great men of
all departments of knowledge who have been helping by their
words or deeds human progress, He compares his work toa
strong boat which will enable the adventurous student to cross
the ocean of astrological knowledge, This is nothing but a re-
production of Varahamihira’s idea in Stanza 2 of Chapter I of his
Brihatjateka, Various authors previous to Varahamihira have
used this figure of speech and there is a singular force in this ex-
pression used by these writers. A strong boat with a strong head
to guide it will take the boat to a very great extent, but a strong
_ boat with a weak head or a weak boat with a. strong head, will

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 10] =====
INTRODUCTION. ix

not be able to reach the other side of the sea of knowledge.
Knowledge is always compared to an extensive ocean whose depth
in several places (branches of learning) cannot be properly found
out by the ordinary student unless a man possesses extraordinary
powers of intelligence, patience and devotion to the subject he
wishes to understand. The deepest portions of the sea of knowledge
will always remain unexplored by him. ‘Various means are sug-
gested for the acquisition of such wonderful powers but as strong
will and determination are the property of very few individuals
many are not ableto accomplish what theyso ardently desire to
possess. Ocean and its extent and depth in many places (branches)
are not known to the ambitious student who fallows the ordinary
beaten tracks for their possession. Venkatasa Daivagna divides his
work into 16 chapters and each chapter contains stanzas varying
from 22 to 281. The total number of stanzas comes up to more
than 1900, and asthe several manuscripts give sume differences
we may have slight variations in the number of stanzas each chap-
ter contains. The eleventh chapter contains the least number—22
gtanzas——while the 16th chapter contains the gre
stanzas. In tho Sirst Chapter woh .ve the -<planations of the vari-
ous technical terms the author uses, and the Zodiacal divisions
with the planetary characteristics, He gives the names of the
signs, their lords, Naveamsas and their lords, signs of the Zodiac
representing the various organs of the Kalapurusha (Time Personi-
fied), characteristics of the Zodiacal signs, Zora}; Drakkane §;
Saptamsa 1/7, Navamsa 1/9, Dasamsa 1/10, Dwadasamsa 1/12,
Thrimsamsa 1/30; and Shastiamsa 1/60th divisions of the Zodiacal
houses with names of the 60 divisions into which a sign is lastly
divided: then we have an enumeration of the varieties of divisions
called Oottamamsas or Vergas, and Kshanikagrahas. I have duly
explained in their proper places all these technicalities as best as तृ
could and some of these will be found to be of very great use in
understanding the results of combinations on which depend lite and
prosperityof an individual. He then introduces the readers to the
different ages of the planets, technical namesyf the planets, Zodiacal
houses, Pvustodays, Oobhayodaya, Devabala, (strong during day
time) 2etribala (strong during night), planets which are invisible

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 11] =====
=x INTRODUCTION,

Aprakasa, significations of Kendras (quadrants), Moola Tirikonas,
Zodiacal signs which are powerful during day and night, colors of
these signs, Vasee anc Vaysce houses, classification of the planets
into Kings, Ministers, Commanders-in-chief and menials, planets
who represent soul,mind ,physical, energy, speech, spiritual wis-
dom, venereal pleasures and sorrows, the various names of the
planets used in astrology, their principal characteristics, their
classification into castes, their colors, the places they govern, the
metals they rule, the seasons they command, the tastes they |
produce, the times which are governed by them, the various
aspects of the planets, the relationships among the planets, the
six principal sources of strength they possess, the positional
strength they have, the signification of birth sign, the description
uo! Puchake, Bodaka, Vedaka and Karaka grahas and their
results,and the explanation of means to find out Gulka, Yamaka-
praka, Mundi, and Ardaprahara. Thave necessarily ta use
ti origimal sanskrit words, where the meaning cannot be
uiequately represented by the use of smgle English words.
Ltiuse words have to be properly represented in English the space
wapied would be quite out of proportion to the utility aimed at.
This chapter contains all the information regarding the sources of
weakness and strength both to Zodiacal houses and the principal
yianets which occupy them. To astudent who wants to learn
asirulogy this chapter is simply invaluable and the facts hercin
suontioned must be carefully remembered for future progress.
Tacn Wenkatasa Daivagna begins his Second Ghapter with a gene-
‘ai treatment of the plunctary combinations, when they are gene-
rally good, orwhen they are evil, what peculiarities are to be obser-
ve in drawing inferences, and how predictions could be safely
veniured; this is eafled in sanskrit Samudayaphala. The combi-
nations fur wealth are then chiefly stated and the significations of
tie third house as well as those of the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th,
lth, 11th, and 12th houses are briefly stated. The Adhana Lagna
“2 coneeption thne is then touched upon with the possible results
waivn flow from thatombinations obtained at that time and some
peculiarities of birth such as children born with hoods, or covers,
ir hilical cords twisted round the neck etc; are stated. The signifi-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 12] =====
INTRODUCTION. x1

cations of birth sign or Lagna are very carefully stated, and this
closes the second chapter. The ®hird Ghapter begins with Dhanu
Bhava or second house which signifies, eyes, wealth, family, debt,
toothache, various forms of diseases to which flesh is heir to, com-
bination for ones loss of sight, eyes being pulled out, diseases of tho
ears; possession of gold and silver vessels; luxurious meals; troubles
from small pox,fires, and animals; and the powers of speech which a
man possesses. Then the author begins the Gourth Ghapter with a
description of the significations of the third house, the prosperity,
and adversity among a man’s brothers and sisters, their number,
losses and gains from those sources, dangers from animals, des-
eription and determination of the various forms of diseases which
attack the native and the possession of precious ear-ornaments;
then he goes on with the significations of the 4th sign about houses,
relations, possession of landed property, happiness and misery,
virtuous and vicious behaviour, dangers from falling into wells,
tanks, rivers and oceans, falls from rocks, high places, conveyances,
and monntains, dangers arising therefrom, incestuous and adulte-
rous intercourses, chastity of his own mother, and her immoral
conduct, longevity of the mother, deception and dissimulation,
honesty and straightforword conduct, agreement and hatred bet-
ween himself andhis mother,vehicles and conveyances,and the poss-
ession of throne or imperial power. The Gifth Ghapter enlightens us
on the possession of children, their number, their sex and the
happiness or misery flowing from that source, loss of children, or
their possession late in life, extinction of femily ; high intelligence
an stupidity, combinations for males, famales atid eunuchs, heart-
disease, powers of counsel, and his respect as an adviser with
description of enemies. Then Sixth Chapter begins with the signifi-
cations of the 6th sign namely wounds, cuts,sores and diseases which
corrode into the body of a man. And the various dieases which attack
him are stated at considerable length, and combinations for deaths
arising from accidents of aJ] descriptions are also elaborately stat-
ed. Enemies and the causes for anxiety from them are then
explained and debts from which man suffers are further in-
dicated by the several unfavourable combinations which trouble
a man in this life. Thus the significations of the sixth house are

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 13] =====
am INTRODUCTION.

debt, enemies and disease, any one. of which, if unfavourable, is

enough to make a man miserable, and all of which, if combined
unfavourably can make a man mad or even can drive him to com-
mit suicide. The seventh house is explained, with-reference to its
significations of the marriage of a person, the character and comp-

lexion of the wife or wives, the number and times of marriages,

beautiful and ugly wives, their unchastity as well as the adultery

of the native, the tyrranny of the wives and himself, early and late
marriages and the sources of pain, pleasure, gains, losses, happiness
and misery from marriage are clearly indicated as also the sexual
passions of his wife or wives andhis-own potency or impotency. . The
description of the sexual organs, their health and disease, dimen-
sions and malformations with the times of marriages complete the
sixth chapter. In the Geventh €hapter we have the significations
of the. Sth house, and the length of life is minutely described.
Long lite and short life and the various misfortunes which attend
the infant’s early existence are given. These are called Balarista-
yogas or combinations for very early death. The significations of
the ninth house are then given and the chapter concludes with the
details of combinatios for piety, philonthropy, respect for elders
and priests, sublime ideas and universal charity. The Gight Chapter
opeus with the significations of the tenth house, and we have
combinations here for man’s political power, his employment, the
influenee he commands, the kind of profession he pursues, the
pilgrimages he undertakes, the Yoga he practices, and the shrines
he visits. Then Venkatasa Daivagnya gives the significations of
the eleventh house, the influence a native commands, elder sisters
and brothers, wealth and its uses, strength of hearing and
deafness, and then the chapter closes with the description of the
various significations of the twelfth house. This indicates logs of
property, immoral deeds, disgrace and ruin. From the dinth Ghap-

ter we have to traverse to the various combinations of planets

which have a general and permanent influence, and which bring up

® person to great prominence and influence even when he is born

in ‘the lowest depths of society. Rajayogas or combinations for’
political suecess are elaborately sketched out, and by this term

political we have to understand.the occupation of a. person under

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 14] =====
INTRODUCTION. It

government. Then the planetary combinations for Anapha, Sunapha
Dhurudhura and Kemadruma are given, and after describing
various Raja Yogas the author claborately deals in combinations
which produce loss of employment; mendicancy, public disgrace,
criminal prosecutions, dismissals, suspensions, various misfortunes
whieh men in high and low position usually meet with. Thisis a
very interesting and useful chapter and a good deal of instructive
information is given by the writer in it. Ghapter Zenth divides the
life into short, middle and lous and the various combinations for
these different terms of life arc very accurately given, There are
combinations for immediate or early death after birth and these are
called Balaristayoyus. These are also minutely detailed and every
student is earnestly recommended to remember these combinations
before he ventures his predictions about the prospects of a child’s
life. In Chapter Gleven combinations are stated which would coun-
teract against the influences of planets which indicate early death.
In the Zwelfth Chapter we come again to sketches of planetary posi-
tious for middle and long lives and -laidteyeryegus or combina-
tions for lives which go beyond the usually recognized term of
man’s life. Almost all nations agree in fixing one hundred years
as the term of human existence and cases of persons living beyond
one hundred years are very few and rare. In this chapter the author
gives out planetary positions for terms of life beyond one hundred
and twenty years and some of those combinations give thousands
of years of life for those happy persons who are born under their
benefic influences. Then we have combinations for a series of
Yogas which go under the name of Pravarajju or Mooniyoge.
‘This is peculiar to Aryan sciences and has not been mentioned hi

any of the astrological books written by the Continental gentle-
men. It is alleged, that by a special kind of internal development
a mancan attainto wonderful powers and can, not only contr l
natural forces, but can also prolong his life to any extent he pleases,
and for purposes he best knows.In India adepts are not wanting
in Hata and Rajayoga practices and those who had the gocd
fortune to be eye witnesses to some of the elementary practices of
Hatayoga will readily agree with me in saying that an extensive
and most wonderful departznent of knowledge about God is utterly

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 15] =====
प INTRODUCTION.

unknown to the Western scientists; and so long as those are not
known to them, their theories will be but simply empirical. In
my humble personal experience gentlemen like Rupanagudi Gun-
dappa, YogiLakshminarasimachar, T. Soobbarayasastry, and others —
have shown unmistakably the existance of a grand science of
Yoga and Gnana for which no paralled could be found in any of
the known departments of knowledge among the European Nati-
ons. Icanonly speak of facts which have transpired'in my. per-
sonal knowledge. These gentlemen I have named above are living
now and ean be seen by those who eare to see them. The grandest
achievement of the European scientists will be nothing when com-
pared to the splendid concentration of the Yogee and the power he
commands over the elements of nature. It is highly absurd to send
all the knowledge which the modern scientists do not understand
into the regions of mythology and superstition and it does not
require much effort on the part of the Yogees, to transport the
scientists into the realms of their mental hallucinations. The chap-
ter as it stands, is really unintelligible because foreigners do not
know what is a Mooniyoga, what is Pravarajja, what is Thapas
and what are the numerous Mantras. But one who studies this
department of knowledge, holds a different opinion and sees events
with different eyes. Ghapter Dhirteen takes the readers to the various
states of the planets and the results of the planetary periods of
Raviand Chundra. The different ‘Phalam which these two pla-
nets produce to the native are given at considerable extent and a
person will be able to predict -vith tolerable certainty when he
reads this portion carefully.

Chapter Lourteen is devoted to the Dasa results of Kuja and
Bud and Chapter Pifteen explains the Phalam of the Dasas of
(मात, Sukra, and Sani. We now come to the last Ghapter Gix-
teen, wherein are sketched the results of the Dasas of Rahu
and Kethu. Then the author gives the general results of the
planetary sub-periods or Anthardasas. The Anthardusas (sub-
periods) of Ravi, Chundra, Kuja, Rahu. Guru, Sani, Buda,
Kethu and Sukra are well explained. Venkatasa Daivagna
introduces some miscellaneous combinations which give various
results, and the work is wound up with thé Karabz results of.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 16] =====
INTRODUCTION. =v

planets. I shall explain what is meant by Karaka in its proper
place, but it may suffice to know here that Karaka means, one
who causes, or governs a particular event or thing. Father, soul
reputation ete. are indicated by Ravi and he is said to be the Kara-
ka for these. This completes the work and the learned author Ven-
katasa Daivagna closes the book without any ostentation or pride
about himself or of his intellectual achievement. Some ill-founded
statements have been made or rather ventured by the so called
annotators of this work, but we can only give that supreme
contempt to such useless information which it deserves. He
does not say much about himself. His style is elegant and im-
pressive, and he seems to have had a woncerful insight into the
astrological principles. Although he never pretends originality,
his arrangement, and the happy selection he has made ot his facts
speak volumes in his favour asa compiler and author. I have
very briefly attempted to convey to the reader the important
subjects which he wishes to consult in astrology and I am sure
that students who carefully go through this book will be able to
make astrological predictions with great ease and tolerable certain-
ty. Inthe editing of a large work like this, there may be some
repetitions -vhich could have been avoided. But the work is
solely intended for those who have great anxiety tolearn but
whose leisure is limited and such gentlemen always find occasional
repetitions -athera help to their studies than otherwise. I do not
claim much credit for any special arrangement, erudition, or
originality on my part. The book must speak for itsclf and its
success depends entirely upon its own merits. The mathematical
portion of astrology is presumed in the student and without a fair
knowledge in it the reader may find many portions of the work
unintelligible. As the calculations in mathematics extend over a
large area I have thought it fit to publish this work without
them, as their introduction in this volume will necessarily enlarge
its bulk and make it costly. Ifthe Maharishis of Aryavarthe
were really great intellects their works will stend in spite of all
attempts +o suppress them by ill-founded criticism but if they wrote
onastrology without a definite knowledge ofits principles and with-
out truth to back them up they will soon see that grave from

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 17] =====
VI INTRIDUCTION.

which there isno hope of their returning back. Venkatasa Daiva-
“ne seems to have been an exhaustive and critical reader, and
his labours in the astr ological sciences have been rightly crowned
with that success which isa sure forerunner of all that is sound
nud true in the domain of knowledge. Hundreds of years have
rolled on his work and each century has been adding greater cre-
dit and popularity to this splendid -vork than its predecessor.
‘The book is extensively read all over India, and if it has not tra-
+ elled to other countries of the globe it is because of the difficulty of
translation and the original sanserit language in which it is written
prevented its rapid spread unong the enlightened nations of the
earth. English translation with original sanscrit text and the
exhaustive notes and illustrations, will it is hopéd, remove all
such obstacles to its rapid progress among the nations of the
world, and I shall be very glad to allow Western writers to render
the sume into other Eur ‘pean languages on reasonable terms.
The value of any book will only be known on its careful study.
Rejection of byoks without study and through prejudice is
suicidal to all lntellectual progress. The Appendix will be an
important and very useful addition to this splendid work. Al-
though the work is exhaustive as regards the horoscopic portions
of astrology, much useful information which is needed in our daily
life, is not found in it aad it has to be secured elsewhere. With a
view to enhance the value of this book I have collected the most
reliable information from the best sanserit. works on marriage,
nuptials, delivery, subsequent ritualistic ceremonies after birth
ef children, investiture of thread wmong the superior Hindu class-

ex, building of houses, tumnples, chuttrams, tanks, and planting of
tupes, wUspicious times tor cultivating fields and digging wells

Which contain tresh and sutticient quantity of water, times for

teavelliner and starting useful institutions, and a lot of other

details which are useful in the life of every individual be hea big or

will man in the seale of society, Many of these details will be

highly usetul and profitable to the Western gentlemen who wish

‘4 vpen their eyes to the importance of time and its never failing

txtluence on all the transactions of human life,

th

In season ‘every
“ug will produce good fruit, but sow the

seed out of season and

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 18] =====
INTRODUCTION. अ

there will be no fruit or if there is it will be partly or wholly
rotten. Common sense teaches this and long human experience
extending over thousands of years has confirmed it. European
officials, merchants, travellers, lawyers, speculators, cultivators,
scientists, commanders, parents, educationists, rulers, diplomatists,
ambassadors, detectives, engineers, doctors, manufacturers, pro-
moters, inventors, discoverers and in fact all those who have any
ambition to rise in this world will find my notes in the Appen-
dix very highly useful and certainly profitable. The book there-
fore is intended to reach all communities of the people in the diff-
erent quarters of the globe, and I have with this special view
fixed the price very low, and explained the astrological principles
in the easiest language consistent with the treatment of techni-
eal sciences. A glossary of all the technical terms used generally
in the Astrological works and particularly in this work has also
been added, and I hope thatit will serve the different purposes
for which I have laboured in the astrological field for nearly 20
years, and in which my labours have already been appreciated
by the generous and intelligent public. As much time and thought
have been bestowed upon the completion of this book I make no
apology to place it before the public with a special request to
them that its contents may not be judged with haste or racial
prejudice. An unbiassed perusal is my best remuneration and |
hope I will be granted that privilege by every gentleman whether
he belongs to India or to any other part of the world and whe-
ther he believes in astrology or not.

J—1—1899
Beriary.

B. SURYANARAIN ROW, B. A.

Inpra,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 19] =====
भा
TAA AAT

SARWARTHACHINTAMANI

WITH ORIGINAL TEXT IN DEVANACARI

& N 1:

PNGLISH '[RANSLATION
WHITH COSIQGS HOFES ANG dEEUSTEATION:
BY
B. SURYANARAIN ROW B. A.

 

BOITOR OF THE SSTROLOGIOAL MAGKIZINE.
Member Of The Asiatic Society Of Bengal.
Ete. Ete. Ete.
CHALTER I

General Explanations.
श्रीमस्तषागरेत्सटाधी AVA MaRS

वि कुट गरं जातोण्पयायात्सधोः।
ज्योतिरशाख्रमहाध्वेपारगमनेवक्ष्यामिनेकारमकं
होराते्रविविस्स॒होरिकमदेसर्वार्थची तामाे॥२॥

Sranza. I

& make obeisance to Sri Kenkataswara, the Greatdari (God) who is en
Seshaparwata, € next pay my respects to my family Guru VenkataNcika.
d (Menkatasa Qaivegnya) whoam learned in the sciences (astrological) and
who is the son of &ppayaria, write Sarwarthachintamani (a ship) to
guide those who are anxious to gain the shore of the sea of the astrological
knowledge and thereby give pleasure to those who are pursuing those studies.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 20] =====
g SARWARTHACHINTAMANI,
NOTES.

The name of the work is very significant of its contents.
Sarwarthachintamant means that it is a Chintamani for ali desires.
Sarwartha and Chintamant are two distinct words, the first
mans in sanscrit desires or thoughts, and the second moansa
symbolical gem which is found in Heaven and which is credited
with the possession of powers which enable it to grant all desires
or wants as soon as they are conceived. Sarwarthachintamant
therefore, signifies that it is an astrological work which is able to
satisfy the student in all that he desires to know in the science
of astrology. It isa well recognised custom among the sans-
erit writers to invoke first the blessings of their family God,
then sing to the praise of their family Guru (Instructor) and
afterwards to give their own lineage. This is not of course vary
strictly followed in every case in the same order. Usually thay
mention also the namzs of the most renowned authors in the
braneh of knowledge in which they want to excel themselves.
The names of the Goddess Saraswathi (Light or Wisdom) and
Ganapathi (Power which removes all obstacles in ths completion
ofthe work undertaken) are recognised by som3 while others
simply address their invogations to the Supreme Power. After
न are over they commence with the work proper.
Our author Vekataswara has followed the general custom preva-
lent among the Aryan authors. He appears to be a Brahmin by
hisname anda devout follower of God Venkataswara’ (destroyer
ofall sins) who reigns supreme on the Seshaparvatha. The last
is the name generally given to those series of Hills on which the
iamous Temple of Tirupathy in Southern India stands —visited by
cnormous crowds of pilgrims every year— presided over by Venkata-
chalapathy of the world wide renown. Asa devout worshipper of
that God the author makes his worship first to that Deity. His
tumily Guru appears to be Venkata Nayaka. The word Naika is
nuotimes misunderstood as being applied to men of lower castes.
ott this is a grand mistake, Naik is purely a sanscrit term meaning
a Teadvr and the various corrupt forms of it ave found in Naika,
Viti, Naw, Nair, Natker, Natu and Nath. Even to this day there

!

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 21] =====
SARWARTHACHINTAMANI. , । 3

are Brahmins who are called Naikas or Natkers. It is clear there-
fore that his family Guru is a Brahmin. The author then gives his
lineage. Itis unfortunately very very short and gives us only few
particulars to judge of it. He does not say to what place, to”
what nationality, and to what age he belongs. He simply man-’
tions that he is the son of Appayaria or the learned Appayya. |
The name partly determines his: country. He must have been a
citizen of the Deccan. This however is not a conclusive proof of
his nationality. A Southern name might be found in the
middle of the Northern country and a Northern namsz might be
found in the middle of the Southern country. The author does
not pretend to write anything original on the subject of astrology,
for excepting the Maharishis none of the subsequent writers on
astrology or any of the Hindu sciences ever pretended any origi-
nality in the subjects they treated. The intelligent homage
paid by these learned writers seems to be complete and uncondi-
tional. They make aclear admission that they went carefully
through the older works on astrology, and that their labours
were merely an attempt to simplify those older works for the benefit
of the sueceeding generations. Even great wrters like Arya-
bhatta, Bhaskaracharya, and Varabamihira, precise and exeel-
lent writers in their departments of knowledge, claira no origi-
nality. This proves one fact undoubtedly—viz.—that the various
systems of sciences — including astrology — whatever they might
have been, were complete and exhaustive long even before the
Christian Era, and that none of the succeeding authors, how-
ever great they were, in their departments of knowledge had
ever the ability to differ from the original works and establish
anything like their own doctrives in preference to the older works.
We need hardly say anything about the men of genius who pro-
duced such complete systems of calculations and predictions and who’
appear to have flourished long before the so called dawn of Euro-
pean History. We must remember that the dawn of European
History dates only from the Grecian and the Roman Empires.
The age of the author is not given. He does not seem to have
lived before Varahamihira the author of Brihatjataka and Brihat
Samhita, because he largely quotes from Warahamihira’s works.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 22] =====
4 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

I shall refer to the question of the ages of these writers in a
separate place. The manuscripts and printed books on Sarwar-
thachintamani with me contain several readings which havetobeno-
ticed and which give sometimes quite distinct ideas. The first
stanza is one of them. But I have considered it unnecessary
to goso minutely into the work as the time and labour spent
upon such task may not be well recompenced by the profit we
may derive. I shall give the text of the most approved read-
ing, leaving the sanscrit student and the philologist to fight out
these niceties at their convenience. Besides, in a translation of this
kind, the various readings cannot be adequately represented and
even when put forward serye little or no purpose. The name
Venkatasa Daivagna is assumed by several astrological writers
but the names of the authors of Kalamrita and Jatakachundrika
ought not to be confounded with the name of the author of this
present work as they distinctly say they belong to separate
families anc the names of their fathers are different. Daivagnya
is a sanscrit term meaning one who can read the planetary in-
fluences or those of Time, and it is a sort of title assumed
by those who are well versed in the astrological sciences, The
vbject of the author in compiling this work is to guide the
students of astrology easily in their attempts to secure astrologi-
cal knowledge and he feels confidence in his innermost heart
that what he writes willdelight and enlighten those who are.
in search of astrological lore. He cails himself a learned man
in astrology. This might sound a little out of the way as
pointing to pride or selfpraise, but this way of asserting is
common to many authors who are conscious of their superior
knowledge, and who feel perfect confidence in their abilities
to carry out the work they have undertaken. If a man feels
iloubtful about hjs capacity to begin a work it is certain he does
not understand it properly and will surely fail in the treat-
iment of the subject he undertakes. His assertion therefore
of possession of superior astrological knowledge shows more his
capacity to deal satisfactorily with the subject he has chosen, than
any indications of self conceit, which characterises the boast of
vulgar men, whose works die long before their authors breath
their last,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 23] =====
SARWARTHACHINTAMANI 5

रक्तांबुजरुचिदेवं सर्वकार्यैषुस्व॑दा
प्रणमंतिचरयेदेवाः तंनमामेगजानम्‌॥२॥

Sranza IT.
& next offer my prayer to that God (Power) who is red after the color
of a bright lotus, and whose blessings are always invoked in all their under~

itkings even by the Devatas.
NOTES.

Tt must be remembered by the readers of my translation
Indian and Foreign that this work is written by an eminent Indian
Brahmin Astrologer who completely believed in the Vedic lore
and all the ritualistic reeommended therein, and whose teelings
must naturally have been moulded according to their holy precepts.
Ganesha or Ganapathy is a well known Deity (Power) in the
Aryan religious system. Without going into the deeper meaning
of Yoya or Sankhya it might suffice here to know that Ganesha
is the reputed son of Parvathi and Lswara and no undertaking will
be considered as successful, whether spiritual or temporal, without
first invoking the help of this important Power, and suitable otffer-
ings made to him. Wenkatasa follows this general custom of the
Aryan writers in invoking the help of Ganesha for the completion
of his work without any interruption. Red color is symbolical of
danger and Ganapathy governs all dangers and effectually
removes them. His another name is Vighnasware or the remover

of all Mighnas or obstacles.
Re -

वाग्विभूतिभदादवी याश्चतांबुरुहास्थेता।

कपुरधवव्छाकारस्वयनृत्यतवाचमा&
<7५;2+ [1],
Ghat Suraswathy who stands on th: white lotu:, whose complexion is
as pir? as the whitest camphor and who is the giver of all eloquence ( 1 1८4
vibhute)—may she herself dance in my speech (weiting )

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 24] =====
6 SARWARTHACHINTAMANY.

NOTES. |

The invocation of the author is offered next to Saraswathy
(Goddess of Learning or Wisdom). The arrangement here seems
to be a little out of order. It is generally the custom to offer
prayers to the family God, then to Saraswathy and Ganapathy
and then to family Guru, and other learned pundits who excelled
in the branch of knowledge in which the author wrote, but here
we have the order a little reversed. Saraswathy is the Goddess
of all knowledge and is the spouse of Brahma. All eloquence
and intelleetuality are ascribed to Her grace and favour. The
figure of speech used by Venkataswara simply shows that when
Saraswathy is herself dancing in his mouth or speech, the work
which he undertakes must be alll perfection and beyond com-
parison, for the Goddess represents the highest wisdom. It isa
kind of prayer offered to Saraswathy (Light or Gnana ) and is
commonly found in the writings of the Eastern authors. It is
also meant to show great humiliation on the part of the writer.
The author does not pretend to write from his own inborn ability
or learning acquired from instruction or experience but ascribes
the excellence of his composition to the fact of the grace which
has Jeon extended to him by the Goddess of Wisdom Saraswathy,
in us much as, she is pleased to dance in his versification and to
produce the desired excellence in the work,

(9)
मेषादिरादायस्सर्वेदिनरापमुखायहाः।

~

येचलोकोपकतारःपांतुमामिहतेसवा॥॥

Stinza LY,

Lit the Zodiacal Signs, the Planets and those Grand Genefactors who
Gre helping the cause of humanity, protect me.
NOTES..
This Stanza igpeculiar. The author is writing an astrologi-
eal work and the subjects treated of are Zodiacal Signs, Planets,
Constellations and their respective influences on our worldly pheno-

 

 

-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 25] =====
O aRWARTHACHINTAMANI. 4

mena. It is therefore fair that he should offer his obeisance to
the Zodiacal Signs and the great Planets which incessently revolve
in them. -Buthe says more than that. Venkataswara alludes
also to the Benefactors of the world. Who are they and what are
they? I presume, we have to suppose all those who have in any
way benefitted the world are here meant and their blessings are
also solicited. It may also mean that those ether Deities whose
names have not been mentioned here, and who all the same, are
continually doing good to the world, The expression grand Bene-
factors of the world does not refer to human beings however
grcat they may be temporally but refers to those men who have
risen ‘to the highest spiritual wisdom, who are Mahatmas by
severe Thapas, and those great Maharishis and Moonis, without
whom the creation, protection and destruction of the world and all
its phenomena, cannot goon. In the narrow sense of the term,
one who builds a chuttram or plants a tope, or digs a well, or
governs a country wisely is a benefactor, but the author does not
refer to them at all as the good or evil they do by such acts is
very little and of small local importance. That unsultied good which
can proceed only from Spiritual elevation is here meant and that
is possessed by the Higher in the Unseen World. The author's
prayer proceeds from all sincerity and this givesa clue to his
development on the Spiritual side. Many are liable to make
mistakes by supposing that great and intelligent authors should
deify such objects as Zodiacal signs, planets, constellations and so
forth. The language in which these works are written, ig unri-
valled in its capacity for multifarious interpretations and the
pliancy which it offers to men of genius. Always there is a double
meaning in the slokas in sanscrit—an inner and an outer meaning.
Sur. is worshipped as a deity or source of Power. We know as a
matter of fact that some mysterious Power controls it and pervades
the physical body of that great luminary and when the Aryan
offers his prayers to the Sun, he offers it to the Narayana who is
Savitru Mandala Mudhya Varti viz. the Supreme Power which lies
behind the great solar body, and which animates it with its wonder-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 26] =====
९ SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

ful and incomprehensible power. T shall not however digress from
my subject proper, Zodiacal signs, Planets, and Constellations are
animated by various but Siperor Porcers. These must not be con-
founded with the physical signs, planets and stars themselves. This
department of knowledge is very extensive andT shall not go be-
vond my legitimate work, by leading the readers to that wonderfal
sea of wisdom whose depth in many branches is not known to the |
highest informed mortals. I simply draw the attention of the read-
ers to the fact that intelligent authors in every branch of science,
have always offered their prayers to the Principal Causes which
they were able tosseby saporior spiritual sight aad not to wross
matter.

> SAS

ull NAA: विमानवानां
यञ्जातकेानेगादि तभवि
श्षिकापिसकरकथयातिततज्ञ ^. ‘ ५

ततपाश्केपिसकटकथयंतितत्‌न्ञः

पर = PAIL es |
नापजन्मसदुशामवातपमदः

(~

्रभसचाजेजननस्यनकाश्चदास्त।॥५॥
Sranza V.

&ll those results which may be predicted by consulting the birth time
(Horoscope) may also be predicted by consulting the yuestion time.” Ghere
IS no difference in consultations based on birth or question times and they
give the same certain results.

NOTES.

This requires a little explanation as it appears to mislead a
reader on a superticial perusal. The author is not here strictly
correct, although ona closer examination he does not contradict
himself. T can point cut several circumstances in which calcula-
tions based on horoscopic rules and predictions drawn therefrom
do nutapply to horary or Prasna culewlations, But as Lunder-
stand the stanza means altogether a different thing. He says that
calculations for horoscopes are based upon the birth time, while

ose fe Jn ‡ 4 |||
those for Prasna are based upon question time. In both cases

(2)

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 27] =====
C= ane
सरस्वत 0100 : 9 ' .
६ yous
५ ॥ | ५. ॥ ^ र
time is the most important शुलणच्छ). € रला निद is bmlt

upon it. In the one the birth of the child is take € in the
other the birth time ‘of the question—hence the subject——is taken.
~ It therefore stands to reason that both are equally important and
that the scieace of astrology deals with both alike, and makes
predictions past, present and future with the same definiteness of
knowledge. * `

ComposITIon oF THE Z,

i
सप्विंहातिभंचक्र मष्टोत्तरहातांधिकम्‌ ।
नववांविराशिकंपत्य ऽसुखंचरतिखेसदा ॥६॥

‘Stanza 6.

The Zodiac ts composed of twenty-seven constellations, one hundred
and eight Padams (quarters) twelve Zodiacal signs of nine Padams
cach, and the Zodiac turns round ome a day from East to West tin the
Akasa or space.
NOTES,

The Zodiac is called in Sanskrit Dha (lustrous or resplendent)
and Chakra (Globe) and is composed of 27 constellations or
Nakshotrams. hese are (1) Aswini, (2) Bharani, (3) Kerittika,
(4) Rohini, (5) Mrugasira, (6) Auridra, (7) Poonarvasu, (8) Poo-
shyami, (3) Auslasha, (10) Makha, (11) Pvobbu, (12) Oottara,
(18) Hasta, (14) Chitta, (15) Swati, (16) Visakha, (17) Anoora-
dha, (18) Jaista, (19) Moola, (20) Poorvashada, (21) Oottarashada,
(22) Sravana, (28) Dhanista, (24) Satabhisha, (25) Foorvabhadra
(26) Oottarabhadra, (27) Rarvaty. These are the clusters of stars
which move once in a day and which clearly mark the revolutions
of the planets and identify them at any given time. Hach of these
’ Stars is divided into four equal divisions cailed Padams or quarters
_and we have therefore 27 x4=108 Padams. Butthe whole of the
moving Zodiacal space is divided into 12 divisions called signs
(Rasees) and therefore we get \{8=9 Padams of stars for each
' of the Zodiacal houses. These twelve Zodiacal signs and the 27
‘ constellations go one round in about 24 hours or a day and they
“have a movement from East to West while the planets have

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 28] =====
eM Rea OS

e

10 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

movements from West to East.. This will be alittle confusing im
the beginning but after a little study and practice the idea becomes.
familiar. ।
ल
मि वपर शुक्रलुेदव ॥
तद्ताद्छवा सू्यशुक्रवुधेदवः \
यांतिभूमे ~ ॥ ॥
रा +चायनोपिचिक्रेण यांतिभूमेःप्रदक्षिणम्‌॥७॥

31424 7. ।

The planets Sani, Guru, K wa, Ravi, Sukra, Buda and
Chundra occupy posetions wethen that Bhachakra and move Srom
West to East and thus go round the Earth. (Saturi, Fupiter, Mars,
Sun, Venus, Murcury and Moon respectively, |

NOTES.
Questions of astronomy and mathematics ought not to be

digenssed in a work of English ‘translation. If introduced they
will occupy more space than I can afford to spare here. The:
position of the Zodiac, its major and minor divisions, the position
of the planets and their respective revolutions in their orbits, the.
position of the Harth in the planetary spheres and its revolution
round the Sun, the movements of the constelJations which have
direct influence on the sublunary affairs, are facts about which
short explanatory notes will be thoroughly misleading and highly
objectionable. These are very important questions and require
proper diagrams for clearly illustrating them. The points involved.
are too complicated and too difficult to be properly handled in:
short notes and the object of the English translation of this work.
is not to introduce the beginner in the science of astrology to the
higher knotty provinces of difficult astronomical problems but
to create an interest in this science by giving easy explanations of
facts which may be comprehended by the readers without much
difficulty and labour. In all works of importance there are many
points which have to be assumed as true or established by the.
stndents. The authors presume a fair knowledge in the readers
and whenever they propound any objectidnable theories the authors.

themselves discuss the matters in a fair light and at considerab

le:
laneth

'

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 29] =====
Praypis anp Pancua Brooras. “I

The why and the wherefure of any scientific problem must be
kept away for sometime until the students have made a reasonable
progress and can approach their solution with a tolerable know-
ledge of its various grades of development. The order in which
the planetary bodies are situated’ is here given.. Saturn is the
highest and consequently most distant from the Harth, next is
Jupiter, then comes Mars, next we have the Sun, then comes
Venus, next is Mercury and lowest of all (nearest) is the ever
busy Moon, whom we see so often and in such striking phases
‘of variations in the lunar light reflected from the Sun.

Et

मूताराग्रहगोच्छानां खस्थार्नागुणसंक्रमात्‌।

नदष १ भियतिहिगुणक्रियाः।।८॥

‘Stanza 8.
The mutual connection between the Earth, Constellations, and the
‘Globes of the Planets and those of the creatures which are produced
the combination of Pancha Bhootas 7” Space, g2ves vise to the

°

entlless variety and characterestics which are observed tn creation.
NOTES.

This isa difficalt Stanza for translation. The beauty and
brevity of the Sanskrit language, especially in rhyme, are incom-
parable and we can hardly reproduce its meaning in any other
language. In Space or Kha there are planetary globes with their
mutual attractions, repulsions, and revolutions, the Eartb which
revolves, the constellations with their influences and the other
Lights which shine, have all their respective peculiarities and
uses. All these therefore give rise to the creation of endless
varieties in the physical and the mental phenomena. Added to
this we have the five Bhootas, the—so called erroneous elements
water, earth, light, air, and Akasa (Space). The combinations.
and permutations of those various bodies produce endless species
-_—influenced by the above bodies and influencing them in their
turn. What the author. means to say is that the endless varieties

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 30] =====
1 | SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

of ereation are due to the mutual influences of the planetary ध
globes including the earth andthe five Ghootas which have been
enumerated above.

AAMAS TAS NSSATA

सत्स्व सरिण जन्मादिफटखुनयेत्‌॥।९॥
Stanza 9.

Therefore we have to carefully find out the peculiarities of the
planetary spheres whith are indicative of the products of previous
(Kharma Palam) acts and from a knowledge of which we have to
draw our tiferences regarding the future by the light of the astro-
logical science.

NOTES.

The world is a great confusion for a scientific man. ‘The reli-
igus systems are so many puzzles and do not help him in as much
as he wants to see everything for himself which is utterly impossi-
ble, taking man as he is and not man as he ought to be. Scientific
development is onesided as other developments are and we need
not be surprised if there is always variance between the man of
science and the man of religion. The two brains are differently
developed and the energies which enable them to see into the
mysteries of nature are differently directed. This ‘is but natural.
The religions man sees objects and their causes differently from
the vision of the man of science. Muscular development adds.
strength to the muscles while development of the intellect adds
strength to the brainpower. In this stanza the author clearly `
hints at the Karme Theory. Karma (results of past actions in
the previous states of existence) as commonly understood by the-
general public denotes a series of acts which a person is supposed
to have done in his previous births and the results of those acts.
are enjoyed by him in the present birth in addition to what he’
may be able to do in this life. The previous acts and their results
are also modified or augmented by the-acts of those who-are-
dear and near to him. Thus parents, brothers, -children ‘and
wives have great mutual influences in moulding the Karmaic.

2

ba]

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 31] =====
| Karnwa 0541411. ` ~ {8

effects of a person. It is not easy..for the man of science to
know, much less to understand, how. a man now enjoys the result
of what he may have done in- his previous births. The theory of
past and rebirths must be accepted there as proved and all the
astrological. assumptions ‘are based upon this theory. This is
neither the place nor the occasion to enter into a full discussion on
a most complicated and puzzling subject like that of Karma and
20001706. Many promises are made by men jn the course of their
lives but they are. not fulfilled. The impressions of sound are
always stored ‘in our favour or against us as we fulfill or break
our promises. Phonograph gives a distinct explanation that —
what we speak or promise is recorded in the ethereal space.
When the dissolution of the body is set in the finer and the msre
spiritual portion goes away with these ethereal records and has
to account for it in the future births for. the various pormises it
has to its credit, When the molecules join together and integra-
ting processes begin to produce human body they do so with the
previous liabilities attached to them. A knowledge of what those
impressions were in the previous births and how they work now
is clearly indicated to us by the rays of the various plancts
expressed in the technical language, of the astrological symbols.
Planets therefore appeur to be simply indicators and it is perfectly
within the sphere of man-to know the. evil results of such previ-
ous acts and take suitable remedies -to avert them or to allow.
natural laws to operate upon him without the slightest attempt
on his part to stem such evil currents, Wherever we turn our
eyes in Nature there is arrangement and order. The transmigra-
tion of souls is accepted by many and denied by some. The
‘existence of souls in the human,body is itself doubted by some
scientists. These are problems which are of a very difficult and
serious nature. Philosophers are not agreed and cannot do so as
long as there is difference in the development of their intel-
lects. There is chaos—but yeb we see there is some order.
Our own exertions are sometimes most -eminently successful.
But at other times they are found to be perfectly futile. Who
does Karma? How does he extricate himself from its effects

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 32] =====
14 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

when he has done it? Where does he come from? - What are
his missions here And whither does he go? These are surely
not simple questions for which I can furnish easy answers
in these short notes. There is no predestination or fatalism
recommended in the astrological sciences. I simply draw the
attention of the educated classes to these important truths for
many are carried away with the idea that a belief in astrology
involves a belief in fatalistic theory aud ties down man to inaction
and laziness. This stanza clearly shows that the astrological
principles are not fatalistic tables. Proper remedial measures are
recommended and no preordination or predestiny is encouraged.
All the important planets which are mutually influencing the
earth and its phenomena, are simply indicators—by their periods
and subperiods—of what a man is to enjoy or-suffer as the result
cf his own actions in the previous birth or births with a freedom
for the Jeeva (Atma or Soul) to enjoy and suffer the results of the
previous karma by inaction and indifference or to overcome the
evil and augment those results of the karma for good by certain
acts of the present birth and by certain sources of knowledge
which might be acquired by proper initiation or by the determined
efforts of a highly developed will. This certainly involves further
difficulties and their solution cannot be attempted’ in such short
notes as these. The making of the attempt to overcome the evils
indicated by the planetary combinations ocbtainel at the time of
birth or of question as the result of previous karma may itself also
be indicated hy those very same planetary combinations, and
therefore may be stated to be a sort of pre-arrangement which
might go under the name of Fate or human Destiny. But it is
assured by the advanced sanskrit Vedantha writers on Karma and .
Gnana theories that the product of the past karma as indicated
hy the planetary combinations is quite different from that special
energy called ege or self (Atma) which has an action independent
of the karmaic effects and a right development of which can be
made to overcome the evil results of the-previous karma. It is
really difficult to explain this strange but mysterious combination
of two important agencies in the human system and their relation-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 33] =====
No Fatarism in. ASTROLOGY. 15

ship between the effects of the past karma and the independence
of the soul and much more difficult to understand it even when
explained in the ordinary methods. Long and learned discussions
alone can throw proper light on these difficult problems of our
life. ‘I'hey-are no doubt very vital and for the very same reason
they are most difficult to comprehend. ‘Uhis Brergy—whatever
name we may be pleased to fasten on it—is the Power which
actuates the otherwise inactive combination of Punchabhavtas to
perform the verious functions which go under the name of lifeacts
and when this energy is not found or has left the combination of
Bhootas, they are themselves incapable of exhibiting any of the
life functions. The body then dies. The connection is very
mysterious, but it is neverthless very distinct. We do make
a distinction between body and mind, the functions of the one
are clearly defined as against the functions of the other and
when we bear this in mind we can see that behind the mind
and the body of man there seem to be vital energies which
may be direct exhibitions of the one Universal Force or which
may be secondary manifestations of the Primordial Forces
emanating from that Final Power. One thing seems to be
certain, namely that we need not be without a hope, when we
make an attempt to overcome the evils which may be indicated by
the planetary combinations, and therefore it is worth our while
to know what is in store for us and make such arrangements as
would be suitable to overcome the evil or augment the good.
‘This has to be specially remembered by the students as it is very
important in the life of a man to know, that it is in his power to
mould his character and his future prospects temporal or spiritual.
If this were not the case astrology has no use, and man will be
hopeless. The karmaic acts will produce their own results so
long as they are not obstructed or modified by external agencies,
and these are sufficiently indicated by the astrological writers to
escape the attention of even the most careless readers of their
‘works. Water finds its own level but where it is wanted for
‘cultivating’ purposes at a higher level we must put adam or anicut
‘to raise its level and turn the channel to our advantage.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 34] =====
16 SaRWARTHACHINTAMAN1.

MIMI Sarert
त हआएसूाद्वि्दा मधिकारवराधिकम्‌।
~ + ae SW तो चितम्‌। ,
अनुक्तमन्यतोग्रादयं वक्ष्९ए८क्तो चितम्‌॥१०॥
Sraxza 10 [1 ।

Therefore those peculiarities and characterestecs of the planets
which are not detailed by me here; have to be learnt and understood
from the works of other authors on astvology. L shall only give such
as ave necded here for my purpose. ~

NOTES.
The author simply says that it is not possible for him to give
all the astrological details in his hook. Those details which are
not given bere will have to be learnt from other well known books
on the subject. Here, as elsewhere, much information on the sub-
ject is presumed in the student by the authors. It is but right.
Astrology is a huge science extending over four hundred thousand
४५१८११५ वत्‌ 2१ is next to impossible to find all these in any one book
however intelligently its author might have composed it.
Sei
कविन्नैदिनसो 7 म्यशुक्र
भौमःकविक्ञेदिनसौ
ककरेज्य्मदाकंसुतामरेन्याः।
S वाहिभानामधिषप
मेषादिभानामधिपाःक्मेण

त्व॑ङडाकानामपितेभवेयुः॥ ११॥

 

 

 

Sranza 11.
॥ Mars, Venus, Mercury, Afoon, S792, Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Fupiter, Saturn, Saturn and Fupiter ave respectively the lords who
०६४ A 1205, Laurus, Gemint, Caner, Leo, Mingo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricoruus,. Aquarius and Pisces. These planets are
also the lords of their Navamsas.

NOTES.

Kuja, Sukra, Buda, Chundra, Ravi, Buda, Sukra; Kuja, Guru,
Sani, Sani and Guru, are respectively the lords of Mesha, Vrisha-
bha, Mithuna, Kataka, Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika, Dhanas,
Makara, Kumba, and Meena. Whena sign is divided into 9 equal
divisions each of these is called a Navamsa or one-ninth of the
house. In these minor sub-divisions the lords of the Navamsag
. are the same as those named above. The counting in the Zodiac

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 35] =====
Zoptac REPRESENTS HUMAN ORGANS. 17

usually begins with the first or Mesha. It is a celestial circle and
we may begin from any place, but we must have some convention
among ourselves to: understand thescience and we begin with
Aries as the first.’ ‘The solar year also commenced with the
entrance ofthe Sun into Aries and the world seems to have
commenced with the appearance of the Sun in Mesha.

मेषादिमूर्घावदनगकोरो हत्कुक्षिवालोभूतवसितगुद्यम्‌ ।
ततोरुजावुद्यजङ्कपादं पापान्विरतंयत्तदुपैतिनाडम्‌ ॥१२॥

91424 12.

Mesha is the head of Kalapurusha, Vrishabha his face, Mithuna
his neck and chest, Kataka his heart, Simha his belly, Kanya hes
waist, Theta his lower stomach and navel, Vrischika fis sexual
organs, Dhanas his thighs, Makara his knees, Kumbha tis buttocks
and Meena represents his feet. Signs occupied by good planets give
health and strength to the organs indicated by them, and those occupied
by evil planets denote weakness or deformity tn those organs.

NOTES

_ ‘This is a necessary stanza to indicate the development of the
various humun organs and their malformation. Kalapurusia
apparently means Time Personified and deified. Where 4 sign is
occupied by an evil planet the organ governed by that sign will
either be-absent or ill developed. Good planets show great strength
and energy in the particular organs. The various degrees of deve-
lopment of the bodily organs are to be judged according to the
strength or weakness of the planets and the aspects and conjunc-
tions they may have at tlie time of birth, When there are good and
evil planets in a sign, the strength of the planets has to be found out
and then the development or deformation should be ascribed as the
predominating influence is that of a good or evil planet. I have found
the application of this principle verified in almost every horos-
cope which has fallen under my observation and my predictions
of pain or disease in the particular organs represented by the

3

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 36] =====
18 SARWARILHACHINTAMAN])

signs occupied by evil or debased planets have been wonderfully
correct. Much discretion and diligence no doubt must be used in
judging of the strength or weakness of the planets in the various
houses. This power of balancing good and evil influences and form-
ing a sound judgment thereon is a tact or ability which can only be
inherited or learnt intuitively ; and no amount of external educa-
tion or training can really be of much use in this matter. This is
a patent fach and we see it realized in a remarkable degree in
every walk of human lite. Seience is usefal with intelligence
and dangerous without it. This is well illustrated in every branch
of science.
~—— + Pa

व्यत CaueU HAAG AAT ATTAAT I
षु दायकरेयिसस्ये नौस्थाऽबलामानधरोवणिक्च॥ १३॥

51.५5४ 13.

1500 एषठ शव [वद क ९८0 (प व (क्वान 0 crab,
Vvischtka scorpiai, Meena ts likened to two fishes one with 26
turned towards the head of the other ant vice versa. Dhanas
resembles a warrtor (Centaur) with bow and arrows in front and the
back and hips of & horse behind. Makara resembles the body of.a
crocodile with a face of an antelope in front. Mithuna resembles a
female with a lute (Veena) aud a male with a club (Gada)
embracing vach other. 7
WOTES.

It has been a serious question, very often asked of the astrolo-
ger, as to why the different signs of the zodiac are named after
some animals and insects, and whether they looked in these shapes
when observed carefully through the naked eye or.through the
optical instruments ? The answer does not seem to beso easy.
According to the Bhoudica sutras, which cannot be quoted at-length
in a work of translation, the representations of the zodiacal signs
after the various animals, which have been. mentioned here, are
really the representations of various forces whose power of motion

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 37] =====
20714647, SIGNIFICATIONS. 19

and couater motion resembles the outlines of the above named
animals. What are those forces ? how are they worked ? why do
they resemble some of the well known species of animals ? are
matters which have to be explained at considerable length. The
letters composing these names in Sanskrit also stand as represen-
tations of the particular forces which have combined to produce
definite results under a Higher Agency. Others attribute these
names on account of the zodiacal signs presenting feeble resem-
blances to the animals depicted. Ram, Bull, Crab, Lion, Seor-
pion, Fishes and man and woman are well known species which
need no separate description for their indentification.

Dhanas is centaur representing half warrior and half horse
combined in one. Makara has the body of a crocodile with the
face of a dear. The uses for these details will be shown in this
work later on.

———— ae

 

धटीजखादानगृहीतुकाम क्होषान्र नामानुगुणाभवन्ति।
मेषस्तुमेषोवृषभस्सएव ककीकुकीरस्त्वथवृधिकोषिः॥१४॥

Sranza 14.

दा १0८ क ८८८४ 602 वणा, उदव in a boat floating in
water with vegctation and light in her haut. Thula resembles a man
with scales seated tn a strectmmKumbha represents a man with a
evaterpot on his head and Simha represents a lon.

7 NOTES.

Kanya in Sanskrit means a Virgin unmarried, and Thula
means a balance. Aumbha denotes a waterpot and Simha repre-
sents a lion. These twelve Zodiacal signs also govern the
different countries of the globe and peculiar characteristics of
each of them may be predicted by reference to the sign which
governs acountry. Onhumanity the special results of these rasees
are perceptible to the keen observer of nature,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 38] =====
20 S ARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

L have often surprised my friends by giving out: the name of
the birth sign of a person utterly unknown to me by simply look-
ing at his.face and the expression of his eyes. The eyes are the
index to the head and the whole character, and when we care-
fully attend to these, we can gradually improve in the art of pre-
diction by simply Watching the facial expressions.

Ee ----
. oN । ~ 3) जन्मनिप्राभ्निकेपिवा
iMicuz, Tae
|| € __ % ~
सएवप्रथमोवर्गं ` त्वन्येवगास्त4इका॥१५६॥
Svanza 15.
T now come to Vergas (Divisions of the Zodiacal sig). |
In the birth or question time the sign of the Zodiac which ascends

ov rises at the time of birth or question zs said to be Lagna. Lhis
is the frst Verga and the other Vergas ae ats dtviseons.

NOTES.

The reader should be very careful as all calculations and
planetary combinations are constantly referred to Lagna or time of
birth or question. Without understanding this important stanza
there is no use of any further attempts. A child is born at a
certain hour on a certain day in a certain month and year.

‘The place of birth and that of question are very essential.
Jolie ix the eclestial space which is marked by 27 constellations
and divided into 12 almost equal divisiors. Hach day sees these
twelve signs and 27 constellations going round once the celestial
space. ‘This circle is divided into 360 degrees and the Sun goes
round this circle once in 360 days. He rises, for instance, in the
sign Aries on the 1st day of the solar month of Mesha and on the
2nd day he is found to rise in the 2nd degree of, Mesha, and on the
30th day of Mesha, the Sun rises in the 30th degree. . This ।॥॥॥॥ ॥|
veady been explained in the previous notes and £ shall show what
is meant by Lagna. Lagna literally means Sundhe.or Junction.
What forces are joined here? and how da they join ? are matters
which are outside the limits of the present book. This gaining of

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 39] =====
Tae Diererpnr Veraas. 91

the Sun every day is called the Bhookta Ghatikas, Every town
and country has its different latitude and longitude, and this
makes a great deal of difference in the .extent of the Zodiaeal
signs. J shall yive-a rough -idea of the extent of these houses,
and as I have already stated, they. are liable to variations in the
different parts.of the world.. Meena and Mesha measure about
4, ghatikas each.. Vrishabba and Kumbha about 45 ghatikas,
Mithuna and Makara abont 5} ghatikas, Dhanus and Kataka
about 53 ghatikas. Simha and Vrischika about 5% ghatikas and
Kanya and Thula about 54 ghatikas. A day is composed of 24
English hours and 60 Indian ghatikas. ‘Therefore each English
hour has 23 Indian ghatikas. Each ghatika is divided inte 60
Vighatikas, each Vighatika is.divided into 60 Liptas and each
Lipta again is subdivided into 60 Viliptas. 24 English minutes
compose one Indian ghatika. 22 Vighatikas make one English
minute. 150 Liptas make one English minute or 22 Liptas for
each English second. The Hindu astronomers have gone further
in the divisions of time and each of these liptas is again sub-
divided into 60 viliptas or each English second has 150 viliptas.
They are necessarily one hundred and fifty times more minute in
point of division of time over their modern western brothern and
certainly cannot be accused of want of mathematical depth
and the influence of time on terrestrial phenomena. ‘he sun-
rise determines the day and the sign of the Zodiac or Oudaya
Lagria. Wherever the Sun ‘may be that will be the lagna in the
morning when the sun rises. These facts may be illustrated by a
few examples. A child is born, say, at 12 ghatikas on the 25th
day of the solar month Cancer. The rising sign at sunrise in that
month will be Cancer itself. But the Sun rises in it on the Ist
day in the Ist degree and on the 30th da y in the 80th degree.
The child was born on the 25th morning and therefore the Sun
has passed 24 degrees of Cancer and ‘rose on that morning in the
25th degree. Cancer extends over 52 ghatikas, and this divided
by 30 days gives us 11 Vighatikas ९ et = 11 Vighatikas for

 

each. day. But the Sun has passed 24 days in it and therefore

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 40] =====
22 SARWAKTHACHINTAMANI.

he has gained fa ne Ghatikas= 4 ee Ghatikas. This is to
be deducted from the 54 ghatikas the extent of Kataka and we
have one ghatika and 6 vighatikas remaining therein. Therefore
at the time of sunrise on the 25th day of the solar month Kataka
the Lagna remains for 1}; ghatikas. The child was born after 12
chatikas. ‘Therefore as the Lagnas regularly revolve we must find
vut which of the Lagnas governed the time at which the child was
born. Simha (Leo) comes next and remains for 53 ghatikas. Then
we have Kanya (Virgo) for 53 .Ghatikas. Thus the extent of the
time to the end of Virgo will be Kataka=1r) + Simha 53+ Kanya
hieslis: ghatikas. But the child’s birth is stated at 12 ghatikas
after the sunrise and therefore the rising sign (Lagna) of-the birth
of that child was in Thula (Libra) and in the very commencement
of it or its first Navamsa

Take another example.

Acchild was born on the 15th of Mesha (Aries) at 20
ghatikas after sunrise. The sun rises in Aries during all the
days of this month and therefore at sunrise this is the Lagna. 14
diys have already passed and the birth took place on the 15th.
The Sun has gained 14 and odd degrees on the 15th of Aries’ at
sunrise, Mesha extends over about 4 ghatikas and the Sun has
gained ! **ohatikas=*¢—113 chatikas.=1 oh. and 52 vighatikas.
At the time of Sunrise we have therefore Mesha= 4—143—2 ghas.
and 3 vghts. But the time of birth is fixed at 20 ghts. and we
have to see which sign is rising at that time. We have now to
bring up all the signs in due order until we get that sign which
exactly falls in the 20th ghatika,. Add to the remaining portion
of Mesha 2.5, Vrishabha 4; ghts, Mithuna 52° ghts, Kataka 5!
ghts, total of all these signs= 17 ghts. and 28 Vighatikas. he
birth time is 20 ghatikas and therefore it falls in Simha which
extends over 5: ghatikas after 1724 ghatikas =or. 48 chatikas after
sunrise. The birth Lagna therefora:is clearly in Simha.. To this
the name Lagna is technically given. The same: processes are to

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 41] =====
Hona ‘snp DragKana. 28

be observed in treating of the-Prasna or horary—question time.
There are certain subdivisions which are made in each of these
zodiacal signs and these minor sub-divisions lead one to find out
exactly in what minute part of the zodiacal sign a person is born.
It is one thing to say that a man is in America, in the United
States, in New York and so on and it is quite another thing to say
that he is in a particular pleasurable or painful state, that he is
in good or bad: circumstances, that he is in a particular house, in
a-particular room and in a particular physical or mental condition.
The more we'are intimate with the exact environments of a man
the greater will be the precision with which we can predict about
any act. which he is likely to do or not. A knowledge of these
details enables us to know the sources of strength or weakness of
planets. These have symbolised language expressed in the case
of planets, constellations and zodiacal signs by minute divisions
called vergas, states, friendship, retrogrades, accelerations, exaltations,
debilitations, Weolathrikonas and soon. The readers are requested
earnestly to pay attention to these facts and understand them
before they venture into the predictive regions of Astrology.

Ss
युजीन्दुसू्योभिवनेरवीन्दरू नाथावयुग्मेमवनस्यचाे ।
रारितरिधारृत्यदगाणमाहस्तदरापुत्रेराशुभाषिनाथाः॥१६॥

Stanza 16.

When a Zodiacal sign ¢s divided into two equal parts, each part zs
called a Hora. Ln odd sigis the Sun governs the frst Hora and the
Moon governs the second. Ln even signs, the Moon rules the first
Hora while the Sun rules the second Hora.

‘When a sign is divided into three equal divisions, each of these

parts ts called a Drakkana. The lord of the sign governs the first
division, lord of the fefth rules the second diveston and the lord of the

oth gou.rns the third division respectively.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 42] =====
24 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

NOTES.

_ The word JVZora in Sanskrit is derived from a compounding of
the two words -Ako (day) and Ratri (night) and dropping the first
letter A and tho last letter ri. In thus compounding we get Hora
and hance astrology is called Hora Sastra. The English words
Hovoscupe, Heroloyue, Hour, Horary seem to have been directly
derived from the Sanskrit ora which means Time. In counting
the zodiacal signs we generally commence with Mesha unless from
the context, it is otherwise intended. 1-8-5-7-9 and-11 or Mesha,
Mithuna, Simha. Thula, Dhanas and Kumbha are odd signs and
the rest 2-4-6 8-10 and 120r Vrishabha, Kataka, Kanya, Vrischika
Makara and Meena are even signs. When a sign is divided into
two equal divisions each of these is called a hora aud the lord of
the Ist hora in odd signs is Ravi, while the Moon governs the 2nd,
and in even signs the first hora is governed by the Moon while the
second is ruled by the Sun. The zodiacal sign is the first Verga
and the hora represents the 2nd Verga

’Take Mesha and divide it into two equal parts, each is called
ahora. The first hora is ruled by the Sun while the second is
governed by the Moon. In Taurus the first hora is governed by
the Moon while the second is ruled by the Sun. So on for the
ress,

When a sign is divided into three equal parts each of the parts
is called a Drukkena, Thas we have 36 Drakkanas for the 12 signs
The lords of the Drkkanas ave respectively the lords of the Ist, 5th
and 9th houses. ‘his is the most approved system. ‘Thus when
Alesha. is divided into 3 equal divisions, the 1st part is governed
by the lord of the house viz. Kuja. ‘The second Drakkana is ruled
hy the lord of the 5th viz. Simha—the Sun—and the third is
governed by the lord of the 9th Dhanas viz. Jupiter. In Vrishabhu
the lord of the Ist is Sukiv, that of the 2nd is Buda and that of
the 3rd is Sani. Soon for the other. signs... Yavanacharya and
some inferior writers on astrology give the lords of Prakkanas as
follows :—The lord of Ist house is the ruler of the Ist. ‘The lord
of the 12th house is the ruler of the 2nd Drakkuna and the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 43] =====
Divrerences 1n DrakKanas. 2:

lord of the 3rd Drakkana is the owner of the llth house
If we take the sign Aries and its Drakkunaxy we have their lords
thus—The Ist Drakhana igs governed by Kuja, the 2nd Drakhaic
has Guru to rule it because he owns the 12th house from Mesha.
and the lord of the 3rd Drakkaua is the owner of the 11th house
viz. Sani. There is yet another system which treats of these lords
in a different way. ‘Lhe 12 zodiacal signs are regularly divided
into Chara (active or movable), Sthira (fixed or stationary) and
Dwiswabhava (Double Bodied or Common) signs. Meshais Chara,
Vrishabha is Sthira and Mithunais Dwiswabhava. Kataka is Chara,
Simha is Sthiva and Kanyais Uuwiswabhava and so on with the rest.

५

In treating of Drakkanas some writers give the lordships
thus—In chara signs, the lord of the 1st Drakkana is the lord of
the house itself, the lord of the: 2nd is the lord of the 5th and the
lord of the 8rd Drakkana is the lord ef the 9th house as stated
already. In the Sthira Signs, the lord of the 1st Drakkana
is the owner of the 9th house, the lord of the 2nd Drakkana is the
ruler of the sign itself and the lord of the 3rd Drakkana is the
lord of the 5th house. In the Dwiswabhava signs, the lord of the
1st Drakkana is the lord of the 5th house, the lord of the 2nd is
the ruler of the 9th house and the lord of the 3rd Drakkana
will be lord of the house itself. This makes a great deal of
difference in fixing the strength of planets in their different Ver-
gas. Varahamihira, Parasara, Satyacharya, Badarayana and some.
other well known writers on astrology have followed the 1st men-
tioned system—namely—the lords of the three Drakkanas are the
lords of the house itself, lord of the 5th and lord of the 9th
respectively, whichever signs may be taken into consideration. J
‘have simply pointed out the different systems and leave the
readers to follow whichever they please and whichever tallies
with their experiences best. This is the 3rd Verga or Division and
is a source of strength or weakness to planets.

es

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 44] =====
26 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

राशावाद्यांराशिनाथस्यहोरां
AAAS MAA ad areal
दरेक्ाणाश्चसांत्यलाभाषिपानां |||
प्रननेतुस्युश्चादिमद्धयात्यभागाः ॥१७॥ |

++ 17. |||
Some say for Prasna (ovary or question time) that the lords of
the horas are the owner of the Rasee and the lord of the 11th house
from it. The lords of the Drakkanas are the rulers of the rst, rath
and 11th respectively.
NOTES.
The differeut systems have been carefully pointed out in the
notes Seprv, aud the readers ought to remember them in venturing

their predictions.
ee a

~ ~<
चरेखपुत्रनवपाः स्थिरेवमंखपुत्रपाः । `

दिदेहेषु € |||, ||

त्रधर्मात्म नाधाद्रेक्धाणपाःक्चित्‌॥१८॥
Sranza 18. |||
Some authors say that in movable signs, the lords of the:Drakkanas
are the rulers of the rst, 5th and the oth signs. Jn the fixe signs,
the lords of the Drakkanas ave the rulers of the oth; 1st and 5th

signs. Ln the conunon or Double-Bodied sigus they ave the rulers: of
the sth, oth and 1st houses respectively. 4

NOTES.

Stanuas 16, 17 and 18, treat of the same subject and the
notes of stanza 16 are ample enongh on these matters. , |

— Ss : ॥ ^ 9 ८१५, ४
सप्ताशाकास्त्वोजगेतरशाव्‌ युग्मेगृहेलसमराशिपात्स्युः। `
दर इाकानामधिपास्तदीरा दोजेसमेतन्नवमेश्वराद्याः ॥१९॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 45] =====
Sarta ano Dasausas. 27

Starzk 19,

When a Sign ts divided trite seven equal divisions each of the parts
ts called a Saptamsa. Ln odd signs the lords Of these seven divt-
stons are the owners of the 1st and the Sollowing signs.’ In even
signs the lords are the owners of the 7th and the Sollowing signs ves-
pectively. Divide a sign tuto 10 equal parts and each of them zs
called a Dasamsa. Zz otd segns the lords Of the Dasamsas com-
mence from the owner Of the sign eself, while in even signs the rulers
are the lords of the ninth ang the following houses respectively,

NOTEs.

Divide a sign into 7 equal divisions and each is called a
Saptamsa from Supta meaning seven in Sanskrit. In odd signs—
1-3 5-7-9 and 11 these divisions are governed by the lords who
own that and the next 6 signs respectively. Take Mesha. First
Saptamsa is governed by Mars lord of Mesha. 2nd is governed by
Venus (lord of Taurus), 3rd by Mercury (lord of Gemini), 4th by
the Moon, 5th by the Sun, 6th by Mercury and 7th by Venus.

Take Vrishatha. The first Saptamsa is governed by the lord
of the 7th (Vrischika) Mars, 2nd by Jupiter (lord of Dhanus), 8rd’
by Saturn, 4th by Saturn, 5th by Jupiter (Lord of Meena), 6th by
Mars (lord of Mesha), and 7th’ by Venus lord of Vrishabha; 8rd
and 4th Saptamsas aré governed by Saturn because Makara and
Kumbha are the 3rd and 4th from Vrischika. Caleulaie in asimilar.
way for the rest. This ig the 4th Verga.

When a sign is divided into 10 equal parts each is called a
Dasamsatrom Dasa meaning in Sanskrit ten and Amsa meaning a
division. Mesha is an odd sign and we divide the same into ten
parts. The first Dasamsa is governed by the lord of Mesha Kuja,
the -2nd by the lord of Vrishabha Sukra, 8rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th,
8th, 9th and 10४0 by Buda, Chundra, Ravi, Buda, Sukra, Koja
Guru and Sani Lords of Mithuna, Kataka, Simha, Kanya, Thula,
Vrischika, Dhanas and Makara respectively. Take’ Vrish abha
an even sign. Divide it into 10 parts. The first Dasamsu is
governed by the lord of the 9th (Makara Sani), the 2nq by the’
pord of the 10th ‘Kumbha\, 8rd by the lord of Meena, 4th by the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 46] =====
28 SaRWARIHACHINTAMANE,

lord of Mesha, 5th by the lord of Vrishabha, 6th by the lord of.
Mithuna, 7th by the lord of Kataka, 8th by the lord of Simba,
9th by the lord of Kanya and 10th by the lord of Thyla. Simi-
latly calculate for all the other odd and even signs This is the

fifth Verga
Ee

नवांरकेराभः नत्रिकोण
चरक्षतोट {इकपास्तुखप्रात।
त्रिरांहाकाभौमशनीज्यसौम्य
शुक्राभर्वत्योजगृहेसमेतु\॥२०॥

“EF र) ` ia

६५

PST TATA TUT RATES CARAT
Ao Sais TEA PA, GalayS ASAT

Sraxzas 20 axp 21

When a sign ts divtded into 9 equal divisions each part 7s called
« Navamsa. J Alesha, Simha and Dhanas count from Mesha
In Vrishabha, Kanya and Makara count from Makara. J Thula,,
A&thuna, Kumbha, count from Thuta, and in. Kataka, Vrishika and
Veena count fron Kataka. When a sign is divided into 12 equal
divisions vach 1s called a Dwadasamsa. Zhese Amsas should be
counted regularly from the Lagua

When a sign 7s divided into 30 equal divisions each ts called a
Thrimsamsa. |||

In odd houses, Kuja governs the first five parts, the next five parts
are under Sant, the next eight parts are governed by Guru, the next.
seven parts by Byda, and the last five parts are under Sukra. ie the
even signs the reverse order holds good. When a sign is divided imto
16 equat parts, each ts called a Shodasamsa. Jn odd signs, tha
lords of the first 12 houses govern them aud 13th, 14th, nsth,.and,
loth parts are ruled by Sani, Buda, Kuja and Rew. In even signs

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 47] =====
SHastiasas. 29

१५.

the planets govern them in the reverse order. When a sign is divided
nto 60 egual parts cach ts called a Shastiamsa. Zhe names. of
these Shastiamsas ave—(1) Ghora, (2) Rakshasa, (3)  06-
vabhaga, (4) Kubera, ‘5) Rakshogana, (6) Kinnara
NOTES

It is. very important for readers to bear these. several sub-
divisions correctly in mind. The author. constantly refers to
these sources of strength and weakness in the combinations, of
planets he gives hereafter, and insists upon their correct under-
standing in making predictions. If a planet is strong in Rasee
{sign), in Hora,in Drakkana, in Chaturtamsa, in Panchamso, in
Saptamsa, in Navamsa, in Dasemsa, in . Ekadasamsa, in Dwala-
samsa, in Shodasamsa, in Thrimsamsa, and in Shastiamsa, he will
he able to give the native all, the highest possible good influences
which he is capable of, but if the planet oceupies an unfavourable
position in all these Vergas he will be able to produce all the evil
effects which are ascribed to him. Much material is therefore
furnished here for the student to judge of the sources of strength
or weakness to. the planets and the reader cannot bestow too
much attention upon this important subject.

". :A planet may look very bright in the Rasee, he may be
exalted, and he may occupy a position indicating great gains or
success, but should such a planet: occupy unfavourable. Vergas
or sub-divisions enumerated above, the student has to subtract
‘auch of the good and may perhaps be even required: to predict
evil instead of good. A superficial reader might get confused
over a horoscope in judging of the. combinatious and their results
‘when they indicate wealth and.success in the Rases and the:native
Jeading actually a beggar’s life. This may. look quite inconsistent
with what the astrological formulas may say::about the résulis:of
such, combinations. The reasons are not.far to seek. A.mah
may put:on a decent. dress, have all the airs of a gentleman, or
gne of noble birth and breeding, but when a careful: examination
of, his-.¢ircumstances is made, the inquirer. may: have various
revelations that..the noble looking person, may be hopelessly

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 48] =====
89 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANI.

involved, or most miserably situated. Appearances may often be
deceptive, and it is just with a view to correctly give the reader
how far he could safely rely upon the strength of the planet, that
the author has detailed in great fulness all these sources of
strength aud weakness which should be taken into careful con-
sideration before predictions could be boldly and precisely made.
The divisions'#re plain enough and I need not waste much time |
and space iti giving illustration of what the reader can easily
understand fer himself by a-little perseverance and diligence.
‘However I must say something about the Navamsas as they
give some trouble to the ordinary readers. Take Mesha and
divide it into 9 equal divisions, each of these’ is called a Navamsa,
The lord of the Ist Navamsa is the lord of Mesha itself 'fi.c.)
Kuja. The Navamsas must be counted consecutively from
Mesha. The 2nd Navamsa in Mesha will be the next from Mesha
(Vrishabha). Its lord is Sukra. The 3rd Navamsa is Mithuna
and its lord is Budha ‘The 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and’ 9th
Navamsas are, Kataka, Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika and
Dhanas with their’ lords Chundra, Ravi, Budha, Sukra, Kuja and
Gurn respectively. TT
Take Vrishabha—the next sign in order—Its Navamsas must
commence from where we left the last Navamsa of Mesha (i.e.) from
Makara. Thus the Ist Navamsa of Vrishabha is Makara and its
lord is Sani. The 2nd Navamsa of Vrishabha is Kumbha
governed also by Sani. The 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th.
Navamsas are Meena, Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, Simha
and Kanya with their lords Gura, Kuja, Sakra, Budha, Chundra,
Ravi, and Budha respectively. For Mithuna we have therefore
to commence the Ist Navamsa with Thula, the next after Kanya,
with which ended the 9th Navamsa of Vrishabha. For Mithuna
therefore we must commence with Thula. ‘The Ist Navamsa of
Mithnna.is therefore Thula governed by Sukra. The 2nd to 9th
Navamens are Vrischika, Dhanas, Makara, Kumbha, Meena,
Mesha; Vrishabha, and Mithuna governed by Kuja, Guru, Sani,
Sani; Guru, Kuja,-Spkra-and Budha respectively: For Kataka

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 49] =====
Dwapbasa AXb &प् 00484४54 5. ail

the Navamsas therefore begin with Kataka itself—Kataka, Simha,
_Kanya, Thula, Vrischika, Dhanas, Makara, Kumbha, Meena, are
the 9 Navamsas of Kataka and are ruled by Chundra, Ravi, Budha,
Sukra, Kuja, Guru, Sani, Sani and Guru respectively. For Simha
we have to begin the Navamsas with Mesha the Sign next to Meena,
which was the 9th Navamsa of Kataka. We sea an order here,
For Mesha, Simha, and Dhanas we have to commence the Navamsa
lagna from Mesha ; for Vrishabha, Kanya and Makara we begin
from Makara—for Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha from hula.

For Kataka, Vrischika and Meena we commence from Kataka.
That is, the angular houses of an equilateral triangle 1, 5, 9 or
120 degrees apart in the Zodiacal Circle repeat themselves and
commence their Navamsas with the same sign for those three
angular houses. If the student draws up a Zodiacal figure and
applies the test I have suggested he will see the beautiful arrange-
ment the Maharishis had in view in the division of these Navamsas.

Dwadasamsa—Divide a sign into 12 equal parts each part is
called a Dwadasamsa from sanskrit Dwadasa—I12. In Mesha, the
divisions regularly commence from itself. In Vmshabha from
itself and soon. If Mesha is divided into 12 parts the lords of
the 12 Zodiacal. signs regularly govern the 12 divisions and there
is no difficulty about this. ॥॥॥॥|॥ |

When a sign is divided into, 16 equal parts each is called a
shodasamsa, Here the lords cf the first 12 divisions in odd signs
are the lords as in the Dwadasamsa, and the lath, 14th, 15th and
16th divisions are governed by Saturn, Mercury, Mars and the
Sun. In the even signs the order must be reversed. This will
not be intelligible without one or two illustrations. Divide Aries
into 16 parts. The lords of the first 12 divisions are the. lords of
Aries, Taurus, Gemini Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagit-
tarius, Capricornus, “Aquarious and Pisces, the 13th is ruled by
Saturn, ldth by Mercury, 15th by Mars and 16th by the Sun,

Take Taurus--Here the order must be reversed, the 1st divi.
sion has the Sun, 2nd. has Mars, 8rd has Mercury, 4th Saturn, and

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 50] =====
82 . SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

then the Sth; 6th, 7th, Sth; 9sb, 10th, Lith, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th
and 16th are governed. by tkp lords of the i2 signs taken in the
reverse order or Aries, Pisewa,:Aquarius, Capricornus, Sagittarius,
Scorpio, Lihra, Virgo, Leo, Cancer, Gemini and Taurus respectively,
by their lords Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
Mercury, Sun, Moon, Mercury and Venus.

५

Thrimsamsa—when a sign is divided into 30 parts each is
called a Thrimsamsa meaning 3;th. Here the order is thus obser-
४८. `

In odd signs the following Thrimsamsas are governed by
Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus = 30
an) 5 8 7 5
In even signs the reverse order holds good. Venus, Mercury,

5 7

Jupiter, Saturn, Mars=3). In Aries and other odd signs the first
। a 5
fivé parts are ruled by Mars, the next 5 parts by Saturn, the next

8 parts by Jupiter, the next 7 parts by Mereury and the last 5
patts by Venus. In Taurus and other even signs, the first 5 parts
are ruled by Venus, the next 7 parts by Mercury, the next 8 parts

vd

by Jupiter, the next 5 parts by Saturn and the last 5 parts by
Mars. ‘The Sun aud Moon have no lordship over these Thrim-
numsas.

A <~--------

युग्मेक्रमाग्यत्ययमेवराशो

बष्टचंशकानामधिपास्त्वयुग्मे ।
प्ंशास्तु॥ श्योराराको रराक्षस ३देवभाग

४कुवेर “रक्षोगण SHATTER

FE: HBA स्गरक्छो १०यचिघातो
११नतिद,ः श्रप्रेतपुरीशभागः।

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 51] =====
SHASTIAMSAg. 83
१३अपांपतिः १४देवगणेशभागः
१५काखो शद्हिनिगो १द्यसूतांश १८इन्दुः॥॥२२॥

१रमृदंशकः रन्कोम र रश्पद्मभागौ
ररखक्ष्मीश २दवागीशर शदिगंवरांशाः।
RYT RETA रजकाङिनाशभागः
र८क्षितीभ्वरांशः २९कम्‌ =करांशः॥२९॥

क्रमेण३० मन्दात्मजरशमत्यु रकाद
द्वा्निद्चोरा ३षयमकंटकांशः ।

३६्सत्या३७मूतां शौरे <परिपूर्णचंद्रो
३९विषप्रदग्धः४०..रुनाश ४ VAAN
९ रवेशक्षयो ९ रत्पातक४काररूपा

£ पस्तोम्यच६्मदंश९.७सुशीतटंगौ ।

४ <वेष्ाएरसिताजं ५ग्दुसुखश्च९ध्पूर्णः
५२--लखाचि ५३दंडायुधशनि्मलांशाः। २६

 

पशुभापद६शुभांशाप७वतिश्रुखभाग
परस्सुधापयोधिप्रयुमणीदण्दुरेखः। `

` , उ य॑करमाद्यत्ययमेवयुग्मे

शुभान्वितांशोयदिशोभनापिः ॥२७॥
5

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 52] =====
od SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

1

Sranzas 22 10 27.

(7) Hrusta, (&) Kalaghna, (9) Garala, (10) Agnighatha, (11)
Mayamsa, (12) Preta Purisa, (13) Apampathy, (14) Devaganasa,
(15) ala, (16) Sarpa, (17) Amrita, (18) Chundra,(19) Mridwamsa,
(20) Komalamsa, (21) Padua, (22) Lukshmisa, (23) Vagdsa, (24)
Digambara, (25) Devamse, (26) Indra, (27) Kalinasa, (23) Kshitis-
were, (29) Kamalakara, (80) Mundatnaza, (31) Myétyw, (82) Kala,
(33) Devagnya, (34) Chora, (B5) Vamakantaka, (86) “Satya, (37)
Amrita, (38) Paripurna, (39) Vishapradagdha, (40) Kulanasa, (41)
Mfookhya, (42) Vamsakshya, (43) Ootpatha, (44) Kalarupa, (45) Sou-
mya, (LG) Afrudwamsa, (47) Susithala, (48) Damstra, (49) See-
thabja, (50) Judoo Mookia, (51) Poorisha, (52) Kalagnya, ( 53) Dan-
dayootia, (54) Nirmala, (55) Skooba, '56) Ashoobha, (57) An-
shoola, (58) Sudhapayodhi, (59) Dyumani, (60) Ludurakha.

This s the order in which the 60 equal divisions of a Rasee are to
be taken tn all odd signs. In. the even’ stgns, the order has to be
reversed, that ts, the both ts the rst, the 59th t3 the and, 58th ds the
ord, 57th ts the gth, and soon until we Let to the first which beconzes
the Ooth division tn the cven signs.

NOTES. 1111116

Numbers 3, 4, 6, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 98,
29, 36, 37, 38, 41, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 58, 59, and 60,
are good divisions and when a person is born in these he will
prosper well. The order is given in the odd signs and in the even
siyns they have to be taken in the reverse order when they become
different numbers. On the enumeration of these Shastiamsas
several manuscripts give different readings. Some of the names
are slightly altered. This kind of difference in the various manu-
scripts, which fall into our hands, seems to be a necessary evil
with which we have to culnbat, in the best Way We can.,

In the processes of copying and committing to memory, there
must necessarily be many’readings and unless there are material
differences in the several readings we may pass on, occasionally
noticing them as we proceed in our translation. In the first place
it becomes extremely difficult for ordinary men to find ont such

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 53] =====
Sapra Vereas. ` 3

minor divisions of time. This work entails a good’and sound
knowicdge in mathematics, which is the basis for all astronomical
and astrological caleulations. After a good study in science, the
inductive faculties are developed and the different states of the pla-
nets given above may be almost guessed by a glance at the horos-
‘cope. This power, however, cannot be possessed by every one and
is a rare qualification to be found among the present generation
of astrologers. This may be called geniws in Astrology. Very few
have it. If the reader can confine himself to the Lagna, Hora,
Drakkana, and Navamsa, he will have a tolerably good idea of the
sources of the strength of the planets, and may be able to venture
safe predictions. But to have a thorough ‘mastery in the science
one must carefully go over all these divisions and know their
relative values before predictions are ventured. The names of
these 60 Amsas are purely Sanskrit and they indicate the nature
of influence which they carry with them. The expressive nature
of Sanskrit terms are entirely foreign to other languages and I can
do no more than quote them for the information of my English and

Foreign readers.
—— ec

CHAAR नवांदादगांडकाः ।

तिंगांशाटतिविज्ञेया अ्रहाणांसक्चवर्गकाः ॥२८॥

Sranza 28
The Sapta (7) Vergas previously stated are (1) Lagna (birth),
(2) Hora, (3) Drakkana, (4) Saptamsa, (5) Navamsa, (6) Durad-
samsa and (7) Thrimsamsa.
NOTES.
Several systems in astrology give different kinds of Vergas
or divisions.” Some authors speak of Shadvergas. Some give 7
Vergas, others say there are ten Vergas, some say there are 13
Vergas and others again say that there are 16 Vergas. The author
gives here some of these different schools of astrology.
ice

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 54] =====
36 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

क्रराष्पश्ठ्शमास्सवें नारायन्तिखचारिणः।

परिः णबरेर्यक्ता स्ोचर खज्िकोजगमाः ॥२९॥

Stanza 29.

Planets occupying cruel Shastiamsas produce evil, planets in
gooé Shastiamsas, who are also occupying good divisions become
powerful to do good.

NOTES.
This has been clearly explained in the Notes to other Stanzas.

~>

"९० नक कर । - खक्षेत्रेपिचकेद्रगे ।

चत्वार समांशास्यु रमीशुभफलाधिकाः॥३०॥

Stanza 30
Ye Oottamansas ¢re (1) Moolathrikona, (2) Swocha, (3)
Swakshatra e¢ (4) Kendra.
These produce very beneficial results.
NOTES.

These Ootfamansas or auspicious divisions give planets much
strength and produce very favourable results. Planets in particu-
Jar houses and degrees are said to be in Moolathrikonas. Ravi
has Moolathritona in Simha, Chandra has it in Vrishabha, Kuja has
it in Mesha. Buda has his in Kanya, Guru has Moolathrikona in
Dhanus, Sukra has it in Thula, Sani has it in Kumbha. But Some
of these signs are also their places of exaltations and others are
their own houses. Readers have to be careful in giving the pla-
nets their proper share of strength and not too much or too little.
Ravi owns Simha and out of the 30 degrees composing that sign,
the first 20 degrees are Moolathrikona for him and the last 10
degrees are his Swakshetra (own house or place). Chandra is in
exaltation in Tauras (Vrishabha) in the first 8 degrees and the last
27 degrees are Muolathritona for him. Kuja has his Moolathrikona
in the first 18 degrees of Mesha and the last 12 degrees for him are
Swakshatra. In Kanya Buda has 3 functions. The first 15 de-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 55] =====
Oorramamsas. 37

grees in Kanya are exaltation for Buda, the next 5 degrees are his
HMoolathrikona and the last 10 degrees are his Swakshatra. In
predicting results, these three different states must be prominently
kept before the eyes of the student. The results of exaltation are
and will be different from the results of Moolathrikona and the
influences of the last materially differ from those of the Swakshatra.
Simply because Buda is located in Kanya he ought not to be called
Oocha or Swakshatra. His position must be carefully found out-
by correct mathematical processes, explained in the Suryasiddhanta,
Grahalaghuta, Khacharadarpana or Sreepathi. he first 23.
degrees in Dhanus are Moolathrikona for Guru and the remaining
degrees are his Swakshetra. The first 10 degrees in Thula are:
Moolathrikona for Sukra and the rest are Swakshatra. he first
twenty degrees in Kumbha are Mvolathrikona for Sani and the last.
ten degrees are his Swakshatra. Swochas are places of deep exal-~
tations. Ravi is in exaltation in Mesha, Chandra is exalted in
Vrishabha, Kuja is exalted in Makara, Buda is exalted in Kanya,
Guru is exalted in Kataka, Sukra is exalted in Meena and Sani is
exalted in Thula. In all these zodiacal signs, however, there are
different degrees of strength and weakness and the exaltation of
the planets ought not to be taken as efficacious all throughout.
the Rasee.

In Aries the tenth degree is the place of greatest exaltation for
Ravi. In Tauras Chandra is in deep exaltation in the 8rd degree.
In Makara, Kuja is in deep exaltation in the 28th degree. In
Kanya Buda is in deep exaltation in the 15th degree. In Kataka.
the 5th degree is the highest exaltation for Guru. In Meena Sukra.
is most exalted in the 27th degree and in Thula Sani is deeply
exalted in the 20th degree. When these planets occupy other
degrees in their signs of exaltations, they are in simple exaltations
which are not so productive of favourable results as their deep
exaltations or Swochu. Swakshatras mean their own houses or
grounds. Ravi owns Simha, Chanéra has Kataka, Kuja has Mesha
and Vrischika. Buda has Mithuna and Kanya. Guru owns.
Dhanus and Meena, Sukra rules Vrishabha and Fhula and Sani

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 56] =====
38 SAKWARTHACHINTAMANI,

owns Makara and Kumbha. They are their own houses and when
planets are there they produce gocd. Kendras are Ist, 4th, 7th
and 10th houses and planets occupying them are said to be very
powerful. These are called the Qottama excellent and Amsas
divisions or situations. Dlanets in the above houses or states are
productive of goud results

~न ---
सप्तवोद्धवांडाश् खाषिमिचरांडाकाअमी।

सोत्तमांशकपद््यंशाः वर्गाःप्रोक्ताःजयोदशा॥ २१॥

Staxza 31
The seven Vergas above alluded to with the Adhimitramsa an
the four Qottamansas referred to already with the Shastiamsa
form what ave coed Thriodasa Vergas “diricen diferent kinds
of divisions.)
NOTES.

The Adhimitramsa Verga or division has not been stated. All
the planets bear to each other certain relatioaship—sueh as friends,
enemies, acquaintances, indifferent, inveterate andintimate. These
relationships are simply meant to show the counteracting or
augmenting influences of the planets in their resulis upon the
prospects of human life. These relationships will be explained in
their suitable places, and they are fully discussed in my work
called the “ Astrological Self Instructor,” the third edition of
which contains very valuable and instructive matter. When. one
planet is a friend to another planet and that other planet bears
enemity to the first the relationship is classified as Suma or neu-
tral. But if both are friends to each other the relationship is
classified as Adkimitra or intimate. The occupation of one planet
of the Amsa of his ddhimitra friend is called 4dhimitramsa and
this will certainly result in producing much good. The Amseg is
not stated here. It probably refers to the Nurumsa and it may be
interpreted to. mean any other division of the Zodiacal:- sien. .

ie

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 57] =====
Varca ComBInations. प...

उत्तमन्तुविरव्गक्ये चतुरर्गतुगोपुरम.।॥ :‡ “¦ +`
सिंहासनंपञचवगे डिवर्गेपारिजातकम्‌ ॥३२॥ `
TRACI देवलोकस्वुसप्तके। ` `
अष्टवर्गशुभवेतु कुकु मांशइतीरितः॥२३॥
नववर्गशुभव्ेतु भवेदैरावतांडाकः।
दशवर्गवेष्णवंस्या देकादशारुभेशिवः ॥३६॥ `
दादङानांशुभत्वेतु भाखदंशइतपितः। |
त्रयोदङानां वर्गाणां शभेवेशेषिकांदाकः।२५॥ |||
3741२248 82, 83, 84 & 35.

When three Vergas are combined rt ts calted Oottamansa ;

Gopuramsa when four Vergas combine; Simhasanamsa wher
jive Vergas combine; and Parijatamsa when two Vergas are
22744. ।

When six 7 + ८०622 2६ 25 ८4 Paravatamsa. Whe
seven. Vergas combine tt goes under the name of Dewalokamsa. .
‘When eight Vergas combine tt has the name of Kuamkumamsa-
When nine Vergas combine tt ts called Trayatamsa. When ten
Fergas. join tn one planet zt ts called . Vyshnavamsa. When
eleven Vergas are combined it zs called Saivamsa. ' Wher twelve
Vergas join tt goes under the name of Bhaswadamsa. When all
the thirteen divisions—Vergas—are favourably combined tt ts called
Vaiseshikamsa.

NOTES..

T have already clearly shown how to find out the various
Vergas or divisions of a house. ‘The combination of Vergas
means that a planet must occupy a favourable Hasee, an auspicious
Hora, a friendly Drakkana, a powertul Navamsa, a good Dwads~

थ

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 58] =====
40 SaRWARTHACHINTAMANT.

amsa, an agreeable Thrimsamsa and a strong Shkastiamsa with the
other divisions which have been detailed already. If a planet
occupies two favourable divisions he is said to have two Vergas
to his credit and he has the special distinction of being called one
who occupies a Parijaiamsa. This produces its own beneficial
results. In the same way the reader must infer for other Amsas
also.

These divisions of the Zodiacal signs and the positions of the
planets therein clearly show that the rays of the planets falling
upon each other at particular angular points are conducive to
health, and prosperity and that the contrary results will be pro-
duced when these angular points are disturbed and changed. We
can easily guess what these mean. A planet, if it were shining
alone, would have no other ray or shade to disturb its own spread-
ing glory and the results—whatever they may be—will be plainly
ascertainable and easily calculable. But it is not possible to
imagine such a case of a single planet shining on this world or in
the planetary spheres. There is no sky within the human
knowledge which has only one planet and which is lighted up by
its single glory.

On the other band the fact appears to be that the influences are
too many and too complicated to be easily identified or traced. The
sky overhead appears to be lit up with millions and billions of shin--
ing bodies and the influences exerted by them both on themselves
and the other luminous bodies which are within the reach of their
rays must really be very wonderful and passing our poor compre-
hension. he intellect of man ig itself the contre of the greatest
wonders and it is no strange fact to say that some of its flights in
the aerial regions are the noblest conceivable. Circumscribed as
it is by calculable measurements of Time, Space and Dimensions it
emerges into the regions of the immeasurable and incompreben-
sible and achieves wonders which can never be described by men
of lesser genius. If Ravi sheds a ray and it is opposed by another
solar ray which has passed through the body of Chundra, there
must be some modification as a matter of fact.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 59] =====
BuASWAt AND VAISASHIKAMSAS. 11

This is plain enough to even ordinary minds. But if Kuja
adds his influence also, the modifications in the Solar, Lunar and
Martiav rays will still be greater. Which portions of these rays
are exactly modified, eclipsed, counteracted or augmented, can
only be found out by the nicest of mathematical calculations and
these modifications and augmentations are technically called
Vergas, or divisions of the Zodiac. ‘heir divisions mean the
influences which are exerted there by the rays of the various
planets. A tree, for instance, covers a portion of a field with its
umbrage, We roughly say that we sit under its shade, but there
may be differences in the thickness of the shade in the several
portions underneath its multifarious branches, and one who sits
under a thick cover of its leaves has certainly less of solar light
and heat than one who sits under its thinner covers. There may
be several spaces under the general shadow where these modifica-
tions are more or less distinctly perceived according to the strength
of the covering above. By a careful measurement of the umbrage
we can easily say which portion of the ground under the shadow
is most exposed and which part is least affected by the light and
heat of the Sun above. But supposing, instead of one planet Ravi
to shed his influence on the tree we have seven planets—as a mat-
ter of fact we have seven planets—similarly shedding their lights
on the tree in question, the matter becomes complicated and the
measurements will be difficult. It becomes necessary for us then;
to find out exactly the resultant of the forces which are working
there, whether as light and heat, which are perceptible to our
senses, or some invisible forces which have to be found out bya
series of calculations of a higher intellectual development. When
a planet occupies or owns a house, his influence is greater there for
good. or bad and he is said to be the lord of that Verga. The
enumeration of these Vergas simply means the intensity or light
ness of tho influence which a planet possesses at the time of birth,

en ES

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 60] =====
42 SaARWARTHACHINTAMAN

अ द्वौ चारिभांरास्था यदिसवेप्रहास्तदा।
 तांडायोगआख्यात स्सवापदधोरसत्युदः।\२६॥

Sranza 36
“Where all the planets are Asta, Neecha 2d Aribhamsasta
the combtnation ts called Pratamsayoga and produces danger,
musery and death.

NOTES.

Planets are 4st (combustion) when they are in conjunction
with the Sun. Planets are said to be in Nvecha when they are in
debilitation. The following are the houses of debilitation for the
planets :—

Rayi is debilitated in... Thula.

Chundra ra w.) Vrischika.
Kuja ,., aa ~. Kataka.
Buda ... = ... Meena.
Guru ... he ... Makara.
Sukra ... uu -» Kanya.
Sani... Me Mesha.

Wherever the planeta are strong, the 7th houses from such
will be their houses of debilitations. The seventh houses from
these—viz.— Mesha, Vrishabba, Makara, Kanya, Kataka, Meena
and Thula are respectively the houses of éxaltations for Ravi,
Chundra, Kuja, Buda, Guru, Sakra and Sani.

Exaltation means the greatest power to do good while debili-
tation shows’the greatest power to do evil.

Aribhamsusta —where a planet occupies the Amsa of its enemy
or Ari it is said to be weak and inauspicious. Ari in Sanskrit
means Shatru or enemy. Dh« means a house or sign and Amsa
means a division. Sfa means the occupation of the same by a planet.
Lat.—Sto to stand is akin to Sanskrit Stha to be or to stand.
When planets are in bad moods they do not produce good. —

IS क

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 61] =====
Ganxpaxtisas or Daxarrovs Tres. 43

2 क चन्द्रेखयेपिसंधिगे #
गेडाततरितयेपाते चन
सयोमत्यंदाकोनाम ~ ~ ॥
त भूयात्तत्कारुगोचरः॥ ३७॥
Sraxza 37.
When there are three @andanthas, end Ciundra occupies any
one of these, and 7s in Lagna during Pathas, ‘he combination 73

called Sadyo Mrutyamsaka, eud results en sending the child born
then, at once out of the world,

NOTES.

The author of Sarwarthachintamani was an adept in the
science of Astrology and has very clearly introduced into his work
many combinations in a highly concise form. This work of the
author is mueh facilitated by the rich language he was handling
in composing his work. I lack unfortunately both the facilities
he possessed. His scholarship can never be claimed by me, and
the English language, in which I am compelled to appear as the
translator, is so poor and unconstructive that I find the greatest
difficulty to do justice to the spirit of the original author. The
indulgence of the reader is claimed ou this seore.

The three Gandanthas are (1) Lagna, Nakshetra and Phithi.
These may also be called their Sandhies. The last Navamsas of
Kataka, Vrischika and Meena are called Lagna Gandanthas. I refer
the readers to my Astrological Self Instructor (8rd Edition),
wherein the Navamsas are clearly explained and the reasons why
the last Amsa of Kataka, Vrischika and Meena houses are consi-
dered as Lagna Sandhies

Nakshatrae ave the elusters or Constellations marking the pla-
netary paths, and their Sandhies are the last padam of Auslasha,
Jaista and Reivathi. After the end of Auslasha we begin with
Macha and a new zodiacal sign Simha and these clusters of stars
continue till they end with Jaista in Vrischiha, Moola begins
with a new sign altogether and continues with constellations
running into each other till the end of Hairathi is reached with

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 62] =====
44 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

which Meeza closes. We then have Mesha with Aswint the
first constellation and with the first of the zodiacal sign. The last
two ghatikas (24 English minutes make an Indian ghatika) of.
each lunar day (Thithi) will constitute Zhithi Gandantha or the
Sandhi. Pathas are to be explained at considerable length and I
would specially refer my readers to the famous work called Surya-
sidhantha, and to the Astrological Magazine, page 118, Vol. II
published by me. Pata is one of the three Forces or Agencies
which is obstructing, as it were, the free movements of the Sun and
Moon in the Northern and Southern directions and there are times
when these Puthas rule, when the sap of the vegetables and the
blood of the animals will have a momentary check or stoppage-
Children born under such influences die very soon after birth.

It seems to be a principle with the astrological writers, to
consider the last portion of a sign, day or Nakshatra as producing
evil to those who are born during such influences and this evil
assumes a Very serious form where the time chances to be the end
of any one of the above three named Gandanthas or junctions,
(of time) when the Moon is in the birth sign and Vyapra and
similar J’athas are ruling.

— as
दङांतिसन्धौ विचनाडिकायांकुद्वरिषारोयदिरयचंद्रो।
सूयोवरागेगरव्ठंरामाङ्ार्तिरोगामयग्त्युमूलम्‌॥ २८॥
Stanza 38,

The unfortunate combination called Garalamsa will be fount
wher berth (Lagua) has Ravi and Chundra in it during the time of
@ Solar Eclipse. When the Newmoon day has the name of Kuhu
and abso when the birth fallsin the Sandhi of Newmoon day when
ihe Vishaghatika prevails. This combination produces imprison=

ment, sorrow, known and unknown complicated diseases and dangers
‘to Life.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 63] =====
GARALAMSA- 45

NOTES.

This is really a difficult stanza for translation into English,
The ideas contained in this sloka are many and require very long
explanations, but still I will and must make an attempt. Garala
in Sanskrit means Visha or poison and a combination named
after poison has an unfortunate tendency to make the Native
born under its fluence miserable in every way. Amatasya is
the name for the newmoon day. There are two varieties in this.
Those who are familiar with the lunar days (Zhithies) will be able
to follow me better than those who do not know how to read the
Native Panchangas (Almonacks). I cannot, of course pretend
here to simplify matters beyond the stage of the Astrological
Alphabet and I expect the student who reads my work to possess
the elementary knowledge in Jyotisshastra, without which no pro-
gress could ever be expected. In the treatment of the Binomial
Lheorem and the problems relating to it, the writer certainly
expects a fair knowledge of the previous mathematical portions
which alone could make the reader understand the higher parts.
Some persons are apt to think that the authors are not simple
because they themselves have a confused jdea of the subject.
I readily admit the force of these arguments, but at the
same time the authors of works on technical subjects, also expect
some amount of proficiency in the student, who is anxious
to rise higher and higher in the intellectual scale. Amavasya
is the last day of the lunar month, and as such has the Moon
perfectly invisible or if visible at all, only to a very slight ex-
tent in the horizon. When the Amavasya is full, the Moon is not
at all visible in the night as he is entirely concealed. There are
usnally 30 lunar days and they.are counted 15 days each in the
bright and dark halves of the lunar month. On the 15th day of
the bright half of the lunar month we have the Moon quite full,
and on the 15th day of the dark half of the lunar month we have
the Newmoon. It is plain from these facts that the Moon gains
some brilliancy every day more and more in the bright half of the
lunar month called the Shuddam (pure) and attains to his fullest

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 64] =====
6 SAG WARTHACHINTAMANT

glory on the 15th day. The Moonis said to have 16 Kalas or
important rays. (Measurements of light aad byvilliancy). He begins
to gain these for 15 days and lose thei again in the same period
gradually. The complete gaining of lunar brilliancy and its loss
forms one lunar month. The himar da ys are not always composed
of 24 English hours or 69 Indian ghatikas. Sometimes they are
longer and sometimes they are shorter in duration. I shall not
attempt here to explain the reasons for these changes and varie-
ties, for they will ocenpy much space and time which I can
ill afford now. These lunar days, as a matter of fact, come one
upon the other in various apparently conflicting ways. When the
Amurasya is full and has no tinge of Chaturdusi (14th lunar day
of the dark half of the month) it ia technicaliy called Anlakuhu
and Nasty Inds. We cannot at all see the Moon on that night
although he retains one Kala enough to keep him alive, asit were,
but when the -Laavusya overtakes the Chaty rdast on one and the
same day and extends itself to the next day also, then it is called
Sturtali and Sadrustunzo. We seo then a tiny glimpse of the Moon
during the early day break if we carefully watch the heavens.

These two kinds of <(mucasyas have an important bearing
on the results which are expected to be produced both on the
national and individual horoscopes and therefore these must be
carefully noted and remembered. Each day consists of 60 Ghati-
kas roughly and some of these are called Pishaghatibas or poison-
ous times. There are others which are called Awritaghatikas,
and they are said to produce very beneficial results. Amrita
means Nectar. The times of the eclipses of the Sun ard Moon,
Specially of the former, are considered very bad and those who
are born during such times become very unfortunate for want of
proper quantities of light, heat, magnetism and electricity or in
one word Vidyutsaktt.

For fuller details of these peculiarities of time and its tremend.
ous influences on man the reader is referred to Soudaminthala ;
Siddhantarainakare and other comprehenkive treatises on the
subject in Sanskrit, ||| ।

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 65] =====
KSHANIKAGRAHAS. 47

टग्रक्रमात्साधघटीहयंतन्मेवाशिनिरास्थितकोणभानां।
राङीश्वराःप्राणपवंक्रमेणघरचतु्थशिसुशां तितद ज्ञाः॥३९॥

चापाचिपयेतिरविस्तुसार्धघटीदयंरात्निकरोपितस्मात्‌।
क्रमेणसा्धंदयनाडिकारःकुजेवृषाद्यत्ययनाडियुग्मं॥ ९०॥

ATTN ATTA NTT TATE A ITT: |

PHONP AYA SAT AS AAS एाधपुच्रः ॥४१॥
व्यत्यालमाभणदिनप्रमाणं
घरीप्रमाणेगदितयथाप्राक्‌ ।
मेषादगुस्सार्धघटीहयंस्यात्‌
मीनादिरेतन्मदगोविलोमात्‌ ॥ ४२॥

दाखान्तरेतत्फरमाहुरार्या

यत्प्रा्निकेनष्टविधौप्रदिष्टम्‌ ।

बाखायवस्थाःक्रमङो्रहाणा

मोजेसमर्तहिवरतमाहुः ॥ ४३ ॥
Sranzs 39. || |

J shall now describe Kshanika Grahas |
Lagnas 27¢ to be measured by 24 Ghatikas each for cach

Lagna the lords of the 5th and 9th from the sign which ts occupied
by the Sun, form Pranapadas ad this goes under the name of
Ghatichathurthamsa

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 66] =====
48 SAKWARTHACHINPAMANI.

The Sun moves at the rate of 24 Ghatikas from Dhanas back-
wards. Chandra moves at the same rate Srom the same sign for-
wards. Ruja 2०४ backwards SromVrishabha at the vate of two
Ghatikas for each sign.

Sranzas 40-41,

Buda moves foomt Dhanas backwards at the rate of one Gha-
tke tn each sign. Guru maves JSrom Meena backwards at the rate
of 3 'Glinkas tn sack sign. Sukva moves at the rate of 5 Ghatikas
Srom Mithuna forwards in cach sig and Sant moves from the same
sign Mithyuna forwards at the rate of one Ghatika in each sign.

Rahu moves at the rate of 2) Ghatihas in each sign forwards
Srom Mesha, and Kethu moves at the same vate tu each sign back
wards from Meena.

Stanzas 42-43.

These results are foretold in the Astrological works and in
horary and loss of Property questions, but they are not of usetn the
Present work.

f shall now say about Baladi Ayvastas of the planets —

Ln odd signs the stages of life for the planets ave, Bala,
Kumara, Tharuna, Vridha, Alasa ex Mrita respectively. Tye
even sigis, they ought to be taken tn the reverse order.

NOTES.

Kshanikagrahas indicate the relative influences exercised by .
the various planets in short intervals of time and these are highly
useful in questions asked of an astrologer, about the direction and
distance &c., of thieves, offenders, patients, losses, gains and such
matters. As these various considerations of the planets are not
of much use in the Present work, I may as well spare the reader
from unnecessary information being stuffed into the present trans-
lation, as such matters will tend to increase the bulk of the work
without adding much to its usefulness. The Avastas or stages of
life in the planets indicate their strength and make them produce
influences similar to the particular stage at which we find the
planet. Take a planet which is found in Mesha. It is anodd sign
and the different stages are to be taken in the regular order, The
first is Bala, or infantile state, where the influence is almost nothing

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 67] =====
Inriugxcs or MANDI. 49

as the baby is not able to take care of itself. Then the second state
is Kumara, or boyhood wherein the age generally fixed is 12 years.
Here the influence is a little better. Then we have the third
stage Tharwna or manhood, when the influence is greatest, the
fourth is Vridha or old age, where wisdom and maturity are to
be predicted, the fifth state is Alasa or incapacity, when the in-
fluence is very weak, and the sixth is Mrita or death, and there
the influence of a dead person may safely be imagined.

1
बालः ;मरस्तरुगश्ववृद्धो
SAAT BAT |
qarqaergyoasita
तत्पाककाटेदि- ८ यसुख्याः॥ ४४ ॥

57424 44.

There are 6 stages—Bala, Kumara, Tharuna, Vriddha,
Alasa 2¢ Mrita, Uke Planets produce resulds in thetr Dasas as
per ther stages of developments.

NOTES.
See notes to stanza 43.
i

चन्द्र २६द्र २२जय १८ वेदय १९ नयां १०तेना & Gare fa-
निहतेदिनमाने । नाग ३० छन्धमितमां दिधटीस्यादत्रख्यसद
शीस्फुटरीतिः॥ ४५ ॥

Stanza 45.

1 shall now state about Wandi.

Multiply Ahapramana Ghatikas with 26, 22, 18, 14, 10,6 and 2
respectively and divide the result by 30, the remainder denotes the
time when Mandi influences the horoscopes on Sunday, Monday, Tues-
day Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday respectively. The
process for finding out this will be stular ¢o that of Lagnasputa.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 68] =====
50 8५1४५ 1114141 4.

NCTES.

We have in astrology the influences of Gruhas (planets) and
Oopagrahas or Subordinate planets. These are supposed to be the
children of the Major planets, but the influences exercised by
them should not be confounded with those exercised by their so
called parents. The influence of Mandi has been constantly
referred to in this work, and therefore the student is recommended
to remember this. The measurements of day and night are indi-
cated in the Panchangas (Almanacks) asthe Sun keeps changing
his position with reference to the Earth. On any day we take the
Ahapramana or the measurement of the day, and multiply the same
by 26,the number given for that day, the product must be divided by
30 and the remainder denotes, in ghatikas, the time of Mandi’s
influence on Sunday. ‘On Monday the time must be multiplied by
22 and divided by 30. On Tuesday the daytime must be multiplied
by 18 and so on for the rest of the week days.

The mathematical portion of astrology has not been detailed
in this work, because the author considered that one, who had no
knowledge of Siddhuntha, whereby he could find out the positions of
the different planets at any given time, was quite ill-qualified to
begin the predictive portion, and much less to begin a work of the
merit, which the author hag undertaken. [ seriously thought
over this defect and wanted to write copious notes on this
chapter explaining the mathematical portions, but as a irans-
Jator I would, I thought, be transgressing my legitimate bounds
by introducing a portion of astrology which the author had not
even touched in the most elementary manner. As I made up my
mind to write a eeparate book, on pure Siddhantha in English, T
gave up all idea of introducing mathematics into this translation,
and I therefore refer my readers to Graha Laghava, Khachara
Durpana, Sreepathi and Suryasiddhantha.

In order to find out the position of any planet ata given time,
there are two methods, and these are Madhyagrahas and Sputa-
yranas. ||| |

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 69] =====
Names or Rastes. 51

The calculations for Madhyagrahas give us their positions
roughiy while the processes for Sputagrahas give us their exact
positions. Even here it is not strictly correct. There are certain
forces called Mandocha, Seegrocha and Patha and their uses in the
economy of planetary influences must also be carefully considered.
In the same way we have the Sputas for the Lagna or birth time
and this process must be followed to find out exactly what portion
of the sign of the Zodiac corresponds to the birth time of the

native.
———— te -----

मेषोजरारिःक्रियछछागवस्ताः वृषोक्षगोतावुरूरौक्रभंच।
वोध॑नयुग्मंजितुभतुतीयं चाद्रंकुीरंतुचतुर्थराशिः ॥६॥
Sranza 46
£ now treat of Rasee Soumguya
Mesha, Aja, Rasee, Kriya, Chaga, Basta, «ve ames of
Mesha or the first sign, (Aries). Vrisha, Ooksha,Go, Tavuru,
Soukrabha, ave names for Vrishaba, or second sign (Taurus)
Boudha, Nriyoogmam, Jitam ¢¢ Thrityam, are names
jor Mithunam, 07 the third sign (Gemini)
Chandra, Kulira ex¢ Chathurtha ere xames for Kataka

{Cancer)
MAMI . NOTES.

In almost all works in Sanskrit, especially when they happer to
ve technical, there will generally be a chapter in the commence-
ment which is devoted to the explanation of these special names.
These are generally more useful in the original works than in
their translations into a foreign language. In English, unfortu-
nately; we have in many instances, only one word which could be
used for denoting a particular object and therefore the student
does not labour under any disadvantage. Whether I write 1,000-
pages or 100 pages I can use only Aries or Ram for the first sign:
in the Zodiac, but no other word for Mesha, but in Sanskrit, or

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 70] =====
52 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT-

account of the richness of its construction and its most profound
development of ideas concealed in the formation of the words, some
20 or more quite distinct words can be used for each of these
Zodiacal signs or the planets which govern them, and this will add
‘much difficulty and labour to the student in the commencement,
but certainly has the best advantages as he progresses in his
Studies later on. I shall simply repeat them in their original forms
so that, those who care to know more may read them and find
them useful when they happen to read astrological works in
Sanskrit.
Ee
सिःच्वक्छटी => संज्ञा
.स्यङ<1र्वलखयसन्ञाः
पाथोन : ववलाच॑कन्या।
जूकोवणिक्सपमतोरिसंज्ञाः

कोर्प्यद्टमंकृथिककीरकोजाः ॥४७॥

जेवन्धनुस्तीक्षिकचापसंज्ञा आकोकिरननक्रमथोमृगास्यं ।
हद्रोगकुंभोधटर शिलं 7 मीनोञर्षात्यरडाफरदयाख्यं॥। ९८॥

3747248 47 ^ 48.
Leo 7s called Simha, Kantirva ed Laya.
Virgo zs called Pathona, Shasta Rasi, Abala xd Kanya.
Libra 2s caéled Jooka, Vanik, Saptama ex Thouli.
sc zs called Kourpi, Astama, Vrischika, Keeta and
ouja-
Sagittarius 2s cated Jaiva, Dhanas, Thoukshika and
Chapa-
Capricornus 7s caé/ed Nakra, Akokira od Mrigasyu.
Aquarius ¢s cai/ed Hridroga axa Kumbha.
Pisces #5 added Meena, Jhasha, Antya «xa Sapharadwaja.
AH NOTES.
Many of these words are easily explainable while others re-
quire a little more deep study, but this will be enlarging the bulk

ष

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 71] =====
.SIGSIFICATIONS OF Stans. 53

of the present work without adding much to its interest or value,
as the deeper and finer meanings of these must always be learnt
in the original language in which the work is written

॥
होरातनुरमत्युदयं शिरश्च वित्तंकुटुबंसुखमक्िसंज्ञम्‌।
 सहोत्यदुधित्कगकतुीयदौर्यचकणीसुखमम्बुबन्धुः ॥ ४९॥
रसात : केथैवेरमषाताखहदाहनमातुसंज्ञाः
दिव्रतोवात्मजतोकसं नः विवेकशक्तीद्यदरप्रदेशः॥ ५०॥
+ MPU UGC Tae RTS TTI
चित्रोथ्तकामोमदनश्वभरत स्तारनकन्छनं दिर वसंज्ञम्‌॥।५९॥
क्षीरंगुदंमूवरुशाभिधानं
गुद्यथरन्धमरणन्तदायुः।
धर्मोदयःचेतृकभाग्यदेवा
गुरु खण्प्टल्रशुभानिचाइः॥*५२॥
आज्ञाचमानं शमथक
CENTOS I
अन्त्यस्यरिफयव्ययनारसंज्ना
खद्यादिभावाःकथितासुर्मद्िः ॥ ५९ ॥

Sraxzas 49, 50, 51, 52, ann 58
(1). Birth time or Lagna is called Hora, Thanu, Murthi,
Oodaya exd Sira

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 72] =====
54 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

(2%. Second house ts cadled Vittha, Kutumba, Mookha od
Akshi-

(3). Third house ts called Sahotha, Duschitka, Gala, Thre-
thiya, Shourya «xd Karna. ॥

(4). Fourth house ts called Sykha, Ambu, Bandhu Rasa-
thala, Hibuka, Veshmy, Pathala, Hridaya, Vahana 24
Mathru.

(5) Fifth house ¢s celled Buddi, Pratapa, Atmaja, Thosha,
Viveka, Sakti, Oodara ax Pravasa. |||

(6) Sixth house s called Roga, Kshatha, Ari. Vyasana,
Chorasthana ed Vighna,

(7), Seventh house is called Chithortha, ‘Kama; Madana,
Bhartru, Kalatra, Dadhi, Soopa 2x! Kshira. . ५ |||,

8) _ शद house istcalled G@uda, Moothra, Kyisa, Guhya,
Bandra, Marana ond Anyoo. — | |||,

(9) Menth house is called Dharma, Pythrika, Bhagya, Deva,
Guru, Tapas ¢d Shuba.

(10) Tench house as called Augnya, Mana, Dasama, Karma,
Rajya, Kha end Aspada. ||| ।

(11) Eleventh house 2s called Labha, Oopachaya, Auya.

(12) Twelfth house t's called Rippha, Vyaya, Nasa, Auntya.-

NOTES. `

As the significations of. these twelve houses from the birth
sign are to be dwelt at considerable length later on in this work,
in connection with the explanation of the different Bhavas from
the Lagna, I shail not repeat twice the same ideas. They will be
shown in their proper piages. I)

दुस्थाश्चनाराप्रदताभजन्ते षषठाष्टरिप्फानुगर्तस्तथैव । `
उदयन्ति ४ेनदृषाजचाप कु्टीरनक्राबङिनस्सयुग्माः ५४॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 73] =====
“Apaakasa GRAHAS, 55
 WoBrpreteaeregatar:
, कीर्षोदयामीनउदेत्युभाभ्याम्‌।

Sranza 54,

The 6th, 8th, and rath houses are called Doosthas. Zhe owners.
and occupiers of these are bad planets. ।

Vrishaba, Mesha, Dhanas, Kataka, and Makara, when they are
Lagnas, are called Prustodayas $ hese and Mithuna are powerful
during the night ; Mithuna, Simba, Kanya, Thula, Viischika, and
Kumbha, when they become Laguas, they are called Sirshodayas :
Excepting Mithuna, all these Rasees and Meena are powerful during
the day. Meena ts called ८०४ Pyysta & Sirsha end hence tt derives
the name of Oobhayodaya.

‘NOTES. : ;

Prustodayas begin with their backs and the Sirshodayas begin
with their heads while Ovubhayodaya may begin with head and
back. The uses for these technicalities will be shown later on.

॥ अथाप्रकाराग्रहानाह ॥
धूमोरकोविश्वभागङश्रुतिभवनयुतो
मंडल च्छोधितोसौ.॥ ५५॥
पातष्वड़ारियुक्तःपरिधिरथरवोरोधितश्वाप्रनामा ।
रोखाडाभागयुक्तषनुरभचरिखोपंचतेप्यप्रकादाः॥५६॥
प्रादुभोवेचतेषांफलमिहकथितंजातकप्रभ्रयोस्य।. .।
(11111 Pl |||

The author now names the five Aprakasa (Invisible) Grahas.
Dhooma, Patha, Paridii, Dhanu or Stkhe and Lndlrachapa,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 74] =====
56 SARWARTHAUHINTAMANT.

Suryasputa with 4 Rasecs andr 3 Bhagas gives Dhooma, wen
this ts subtracted from 12 signs, the remainder indicates Patha, we
6 Raxees are added to this we get Paridhe ; 441s sudtracted, from
the 12 signs gives Indrachapa ; ¢his with 17 Bhagas added will
give Dhanu or Sikhi.

NOTES.

Unless the reader knows Sputas he will not be able to under-

stand this stanza.

He must refer to any one of the Siddanthas which give the
processes for Grahasputa and then, after he finds the Surya
Sputa, he has simply to add and subtract in the manner indicated
above and find out were these invisible but at the same time mis-
chievous planets are located. When any of the Bhavas are occu-
pied by these Dhoomadigrahas they predict unhappiness and loss
to the significations related to these Zodiacal signs.

|||, ^ ॥॥/॥॥
॥ कंटकादित्त्च विंहोषाना ¦ ॥
व्योमास्तवाताकवि eee TAt
वदन्तिनामानिमुनीद्रमुख्याः ॥ ५७ ॥
स्यात्कंटककेद्रमथोचतुष्टयं
वगोत्तमाख्यर नवां कस५।. ।
विप्रादिकव्णचतुष्टयन्तु
करमेणमोनादिपुनःपुनस्वा, . ॥ ५८ ॥
Sranzas 57 & 58.

f will now explain Kantakas G'c. The 1st, th, 7th and roth
houses are called Kantaka, Kendra, Chatustaya. The same
Navansa ts called Vargottma # Meena and the Sollowing Rasees
cre calld Brahma, Kshatriya, Vaiysa end Sudra, respectively.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 75] =====
V ARGOTTAMAMSAs bd

NOTES.

As already explained these are all technical portions of the
astrological science and they must be carefully borne in mind.
Planets occupying Kendras, planets owning Kendras and the houses
forming the Kendras themselves are exercising great influence
over the destinies of mankind and without a fair knowledge of all
these preliminaries, no student can hope to make any safe predic-
tions in the field of astrology. ‘The explanation for Kendras is
easy enough. If we want to find out Kendras for any house
observe the following rule. Viz. the first house we commence,
its fourth, its seventh, and its tenth houses are called Kendras
or quadrants or the angles of a square. Vargottamamsa is one of
the Navamsas, We have already explained in its proper place
what is a Navamsa. Where the Navamsa happens to fallin the
game sign, as it does in the Rasee, it is technically called a Vargottu-
ma ४6 is productive of much good. Take an example. If a
person is born in the sign Aries (Mesha) and the Navamsa of his
birth also falls in Aries, then that Navamsa is called Vargottama.
The same for all other signs. In Brihatjataka this is well ex-
plained. We have three sets of signs, Movable, Fized and Common
and the rule is, the lst Navamsa in the Movable, the 5th
Navamsa in the Fired and the last Navamsa in the Common signs
are Vargottamas and this comes up to the same explanation as that
givenabove. The distinction of Brahma, Kshetriya, Vaisya and
Sudra has to be noted. The author asks us to commence from
Meena. Meena and its Thrikonas or triangular houses, are Brahma
Rasees. This includes Meena, Kataka and Vrischika. Mesha,
Simba, and Dhanus form Kshetrya Rasees. Vrishaba, Kanya,
and Makara are Vaisya Rasees. Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha
form Sudra Rasees. - These “technical divisions have much to
explain about the characteristics of the persons born in those
Rasees. |

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 76] =====
58 SALWARTHACHINTAMANE

So + | ५
ओजोपिर गम॑न्वजितःक्रमेण
चरंस्थिरंचेत्युभयंक्रमात्पुनः।
पू्णार्धपाः Vee MT eerste TIT
पणाधपाद्‌ ह ष्टटनादल्दय
year 044 ०04
हराशिच व्कमाहुः ॥ ५९॥
Stanza 59,
The signs are odd amt even rerularly from Mesha, they are also
movable, fixed and common tn the same way from Mesha; the signs
Srou JMeene regularly form Poornjalaka, Arthajalaka, Pada-
jalaka ed Nirjalaka.
NOTES.

For Odd, Even, Moveable (Chara) Fixed (Sthira) and Common
(Dwidaha or Dwiswabhava) commence from Aries or Mesha and
procecd, Mesha, Mithuna, Simha; ete., or the Ist, 8rd, 5th, 7th,
9th and 11th signs from Mesha are Oja or odd signs. 2nd, 4th,
6th, 8th, 10th, 12th signs are Yoogma creven signs. Their uses
are to be found later on as we progress in our knowledge of astro-
logy. Mesha, Kataka, Thula and Makara, are Movable or Chara
Rasees. Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha are Fixed or
Sthira Rasees. Mithuna, Kanya, Dhauus, and Meena, are Com-
mon or Duiswabhara Rasees. Meena, Kataka, Vrischika are
Poornajalaku. Rasees. Mesha, Simha, and Dhanus are Artha-
jalakas. Vrishaba, Kanya and Makara are Padaalakas and
Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha are Nicjulukas.

——— a

PTT कीवेखदयाक्मादियम्‌ ।

सज्ञादाददाभावाना वनज्ञात्व्यान पुन ॥ &० ॥
214 ९2५ 60

From the birth we have Kendras, Panaparas ¢¢ Aupoklibas
regularly among the twelve Zodiacal signs.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 77] =====
Nana, Kira, Pase ano Jana Raspes. 59

NOTES.

Take the birth, or question time or any other Rasee, and
then Ist é.¢. itself, its fourth, 7th and 10th, as already explained
are Kendras, the 2nd, 5th, Sth and 11th houses are called Pana-
patus ; the 8rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses are called Aupoklibas.
Planets are very powerful generally in Kendras, moderately
powerful in Paraparas and least powerful in Aupoklibas. These
are considered at great length in the Sanskrit works.

SHANA TATASAT: HlSTATATAT ATA!

RSA . परभेपिचोक्तबहभिर्सनद्र ५ Sey
वलाधिकस्याः HAC TTA: Ng
Stanza 61.

Wiex Nara, Rasees fad! tn birth, when Jalachara Rasees
fallin fourth, when Kita, Rasees (ad? 2 seventh, and Pagu or

Chatushpada§Rasees fall in tenth, they become powerful whether
2x horoscopy or 2x Prasna, (orary.)

NCTES..

If the Lagna falls in Nara, the fourth in Jalachara, the
seventh in Kita, and the tenth house in Pasu Ltasees, they bacome
powerful in producing good. (Vide Stanza 17, Ch. I, in Brihatja-
taka) Nara Rasees are Mithuna, Aanya, Thula, the first half of
Dhaius and Kumbha. Tf these are birth signs, or Lagnas they
are good. Nara means in Sanskrit male. Jalachava Rusees are
Katala, the latter or second half of Makarw, and Meene and these
are powerful when they become the fourth houses from Laguna.
Frischika is called Kita Rasee and it is powerful when it is the
seventh house from Lagna. Pasu Rasces are Mesha, Vrishabha,
Simha, the second half of .Dhanus, and the first half of Makara
and these become powerful when they are 10th houses from
Lagna. Kita means an insectand Vrischika is Scorpion. Jala-
chara means those animals which live or move in water; and Pasu

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 78] =====
60 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT

or Chatushpada means beasts or those which have four legs or of
the quadruped kind. ~
— aia

तत्सप्तमेतदिवल्प्रष्षठिं

SAAT TATA: Ut

॥ अथग्रहाणासुञ्चस्थानान्यार ॥
मेषोक्षनक्रास्सुदतीकुढीर
मीनास्तुरोच्ारविपूरवकाणाम्‌॥६२॥
HIT ue Co AAA जार २८ |||
मान्यं १५ मन ५ स्सार२७ ALT VORA

स्यात्सप्तमं तस्यचतस्यनीच `
मु्ोक्तभागाःकिलनीचमेपि ५ ६२॥

Sranzas 62 & 63.

These Rasees become powerless tu the seventh houses from where
they are saad to become powerful. Rau, Chuudva, Kuja, Budha,
Guru, Sukra and Sant are respectively exaited (Oocha) in Mesha,
Vrishaba, Makara, Kanya, Kataha, Meena and Thula. The roth,
ord, 28th, 15th, sth, 27th and 20th Bhagas 2% these respective Rasees
are called the most exalted (Parama, 0061198.) 7८52015 for the above
planets. The seventic house fron these are their houses of debilitas
fon (Neecha) aud the same numbers among these divisions are those
where they arc most debilitated (Paramaneecha.}

NOTES.
Exaltations and debilitations have already been explained.
When a sign is divided into 30 equal parts each is technically

called a Bhaga and we may also call it a Thrimsamsa, The tenth
£haga in Mesba, 8rd in Vrishabha, 28th in Makara, ith in Kan-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 79] =====
21001411 ६1043. 61
ya, 5th in Kataka, 27th in Meena and 20th in Thula are Paraima-
oochas or the most exalted regions for Ravi,;Chundra, Kuja, Budha,
Guru, Sukra and Sani respectively. The seventh from these where
they are most exalted form places for their greatest humiliation.
The Circle is divided into 360 Cegrees, and 180 degrces form a
semi or half Circle. If a planet is exalted in the first degree of
the Zodiac, it is debilitated in the 181st degree
Se hia -

॥ अथमूखत्रिकोणविवेकमाह ॥
सिंहोक्षमेषास्सुदतीचचाप
स्तोरिश्चकुंभो रविपूर्वकाणां ।
मूखत्रिकोर्णक्रमरोवदन्ति
भागास्तदीयोच्चसमाभवेयु :॥६४॥

 

Stanza 64.

4 5८24४ 70८४ 5८८ ०६०४४ 1 0012.610117018.8

Simha for Ravi, Vrishabha for Chundra, Mesha for Kuja, Kany
jor Buda, Dhanas for Guru, Thula for Sukva, and Kumbha for
Sant are said to become Weoolathrikonas. These are constdered
almost equal in strength to their places of exaltation

NOTES

here are several readings for this stanza. Some of the Com-
mentators in%the Vernaculars have falsely explained the meauing.
Men, who are incompetent to handle scientific subjects, ought not
to come forward aS exvounders of them: :" Moclathrikona is a tech-
nical word like Oocha and means that by angular position of the
planet it acquires a great source of strength and it is almost equal
to its state of exaltation. Hxaltation is the highest point where
the planet acquires the best strength for doing good, whether it
is called auspicious or inauspicious. The results of the exaltation
of the various planets of course vary as their individual character-
istices. See notes to Stanza 30

ध |

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 80] =====
62 SAnWARTHACHINTAMANL

दिवाबटिष्ठानररहायस्थुः
रात्रौ. लान्याः पदावश्चकीटाः।
स: बादयेश्रातुभवास्पवानां
सषघ्ठभानासुपचायकत्वम्‌ ॥६५॥

Sraxza 65
Nara Rasees ere powerfnl during the day Quadrap ed or
Pasu Rasees ve strong during the mght and Kita and Jala-
chara Rasees @7¢ stroug duriug the two Sandhyas The 3rd,
6th, toth and 12th houses are called Oopachayas.
| अण्ण.

In the notes to stanza 58, we have shown which are Nura, Pasu,
Kits and Julachaia Rasees: Vara Rasees exercise a powerful
influence during the day time, the Pasu Rasees do so in the night,
while the Aifw and Juluchara exert much influence during the
two Saudhyos. Sawihi in Sanskrit means junction orunion. There
are two sandhies viz Pratura and Sayam, the morning and the even-
ing twilights ax we familiarly recognise them. Two Ghatikas
after half sunset & two ghatikas before half sunrise are technically
called sandhies, Ovupachayas means improvement or expansion
and planets oceupying these houses are capable of dog much
good to the native. In the absence of anything to tie contrary
all these houses must be counted from the birth sign.

a

॥ अथ राशिवर्णानाह ॥
रक्तश्वेतःदयामकांतिस्तुरक्तो
PATS ACT AT: |
सखणभिस्याक्तबुरोबभूव्णं

र न्ेकमेक्थितो जादेभानाम्‌ ॥६६॥

 

Staxza 66.
Sf now describe the colors of the signs.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 81] =====
Exreny of Rasges. 63.

Red, white, green, ved,smoke, varigated, black, golden, golden,
whitish dull yellow, blackish white, and pure whttle are the colors of
the respective signs from Mexha.

NOTES,

‘There are some slight differences between the different readings
as also among the astrolagical writers. In Brihatjataka of Vara-
hamihira the colors are given in slightly different forms.

Kataka—W hitish red
Simha— Smoky white
Dhanus—Pingala or dull yellow

These colors of the different signs have much influence in
modifying the complexion of the person or objects under their
rule.

Ee ------

वेहाीस्थार्नसूर्ययुक्ताहितीयं चक्राधेस्मिवमानमाहमुंर्नद्राः।
वेद्स्याह्मणसंख्यातिकवेवेरोस्यादाजू्छारि दकः ण NEI

Sranza 67,

The second from the Rasce occupied by the Sun is called Vase.
Ln the first half of the Zodiac, 5,6, 7,8, 9, 10, multiplied by 4 and
encreascd by 10, will give their respective extents, zx Vighatikas,
and in the other half of the Zodiac, the same done tin the reverse
order holds good.

NOTES.

This Stanza is very concise and may not be intelligible with-
out detailed explanation. In every month the Sun, as a matter
of fact, occupies some house. The second house from the house
where we find the Sun is called Vasee and is of much importance
in the Raja Yogadhya. The author wants us to follow him in
determining the extent of the different signs. The signs in the
first half of the Zodiac are Mesha, Vrishaba, Mithuna, Kataka,
Simha and Kanya, and the signs in the latter half of the Zodiac

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 82] =====
64 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT

are, Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Meena. Tn
the first half the figures 5, 6,7, 8.9 and 10 are to be multiplied by
4, and we get 20, 24,98 32, 36 and 40: these multiplied by 10 will
give the signs the extent they have in Vighatikas. We have then
200, 240, 280, 320, 360 and 40 Vighatikas for Mesha, Vriskabha,
Mithuna, Kataka, Simha, and Kanya respectively. The same holds
good in the reverse order in the other 6 signs of the 2nd half of
the Zodiac viz, Thula, Vriseluaka, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and:
Meena. Thus we have 400, 360, 320, 280, 240 and 250 for Thula,
Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Meena. Summarised,
the results run as follow :— ,
' Mesha and Meena extend over ... 200 Vighatikas,

Vrishaba and Kumbha_... .. 240 ‘do.

Mithuna and Makara 1; we. 280 de.

Kataka and Dhanns रत ,.. 320 do.

Simha and Vrischika Be --. 360 do.

Kanya and Thula ... at -- 400 do.

The following table may be remembered in connection with
the Indian and English distribution of times,

English calculation.

A day is divided into 24 hours, an hour contains 60 minutes
and a minute contains 60 seconds, thus 24 H. x 60° x 60" = 86,
400 seconds are contained in a day.

Hindu calculation—

A day is divided into 69 Ghatikas. A Ghatika is divided’
into 60 Fiyhatikas. A Hora contains 23 Ghatikas and 94 Boras
make a day. 8 Yamas form a day, and 3 Horas make a Yama.
We shall not go to further minute sub-divisions as they do not
much concern the student in the beginning. An Indian Hura
corresponds to an English hour. An Indian Ghatila means 24
English minutes and an Indian Vighatika is equal to 24 English
seconds or an English minute is equal 23 Indian Vighatikas. As
these are very, familiar I need not explain any further. Though
the uses for these are not given here by the author, I may explain

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 83] =====
Powrrs OF ति, प्र. 65
to the reader that the different organs of Kalapurusha signify
much in judging the different bodily organs of a man. The
twelve Zodiacal signs signify those organs. Signs which
are of larger extent, signify larger proportions of the organs and
those which are of smaller extent signify shorter development and
those which are of moderate extent signify uormal growth. In
the body of man different organs may have different proportions
and different growths. One may have long legs and short hands,
another may have long hands and short legs. One may have
large chest and small head and so on. hese are signified by the
extent of the Rasees, andl the aspects and conjunetions which
they ‘have. In Pyusna or questions, about loss of property, ap-
proach of enemies in invasions &c,, these signs signify distances
of persons about whom we may ask our information. I refer the
reader to notes on Stanza #2 of this Chapter.
~ a Et

॥ अथ प्रहाधिकारानाह ॥
दिनेशचन्द्रौनरपालकाख्यौ
नेताकुजस्सोमसुतःकुमारः।
शुक्र दरप्रन्यौसचिवोदानिस्तु
्रेप्यश्चतदढ्तिसुषेतिजातः॥ ६८ ॥

Stanza 68.
Ravi and Chandra are Ragas, Kuga ts ण athy, Butha is Yoa-
va-Razga, Guru ant Sukré are ministers and Saut 7s servant,
NOTES...

Among the planets certain conditions and powers are laid down,
not because they are themselves such, but because they indicate
certain results to the native born under those influences. Raviand
Chundra represent kingly power, Kuja shows military strength,
Budha represents the heir apparent, Guru and Sukra, represent the
councillors or advisers and Sani represents the labourer or workman.
These are useful to judge of the fature of a man and the kind of

9

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 84] =====
66 SRW ARTHAGHINTAMANS.

work which he is likely to da to earn his livelikood. Of course
these are the main divisions and these may he subdivided into
innumerable varieties.

—— en
at कर); KE rae:
AAT 2a tae Hele LEAS TTT: |
op > SN. गुक्रोभवेदकसुतस्तुदु
ATA tre FN CEREC ES? 087 शुक्रोभवेदरक॑सुतस्तुदुःखम्‌॥६९॥
Stanza 69.
Rav? represents the soni, Chundra shows mind, Kuga exhibits

strength, Budha represents speech, Guru shows gana or knowledge,
Sukva represents cupidity ant Sant shows sorrow,

NOTES.

There are several things to be noted in man. ‘These are the
strength and depth of his soul and mind, the physical capacity to
work or bear fatigue, the rhetorical powers so productive of good
or bad results, the charitable and relivious disposition, the fondness
for sexual and temporal pleasures, and the state of the mind,
optimistic, or pessimistie. We have to take cirenumstances as they
happen with a light heart, aud control them or readily vield
ourselves to their influences and be eontwlled by them.

॥ अथ ग्रहसंज्ञा नाह ॥
सयो हेकिर्मानुमातीडरदमी
चण्डांशुस्याद्भास्करोहस्करश्च ।
ASAT? TTT

aftayeTTtE HAE ingen

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 85] =====
\ ५6
01४ च \ भत (0 (प. ७८

आरोवक्रश्चावनेयःकुजस्या
FUT ASSAULTS: |
विद्र स्सौम्योबोधनध्रदुपुत्र
.  . श्वाद्रिःख्यातदामगात्रोतिदीधः॥॥७१॥
जीवंँगिरादेवगुरुःप्रहांतो वाचांपतिस्यात्रिददोरावन्यः।
भृगुस्फुजिद्रागवजोशनाश्च सुखीकविदैत्यगुरुस्सितश्च॥॥७२॥
छायात्मज रपगुयमाकंसूनवः
कोणोसितस्सौरिडानीचनीलः।
रर ःकृशांगःकपिलाक्षसर्पो
तमोसुरश्चापिचसेंहिकेयः॥७३॥ `
छायाग्रहश्वापिविधुन्तुदश्च
खर्भानुरक्तोगुरुधीचराहुः।
केतुरिराखीस्यातध्वजनामधेयो
नवापिखेटाश्चरखगाम्रहास्युः॥७९॥
Svanzas 70, 71, 72, 738 & 74
The author now gives the various special names used for the planets.
1. Surya, Hayli, Bhanu, Marthanda. Rasmi. Chund-
amsa, Bhaskara, Ahaskara, Deeptha Rasml, 7¢ other special
names for Ravi (Suz).
2. Abja, Soma, Chundra, Seetharasmi. Seethamsa- Glou,
Mruganka, Kalanki ¢7¢ vanes for Chundra (Woon.
8. Ara, Vakra, Avanaya. Kuja. Bhouma Krura, Lohi-
tanga. Dharaja, «re wames Sor Kuja (Mars).
4, Vit, Gno. Soumya, Bodhana, Induputra Chandri,

Khyata, Syamagatra: Atidirgha, Shanta, eve “ames for
Buda (Mercury).

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 86] =====
08 NARWAL LH ACHIA PAMANT

5. Jiva, Angiras, Devaguru. 9 Vachaspathi.
Thridasandra Vandya, Eejya eve vames for Guru ( Fupiter),

6, Bhrugu, Spujit, Bhargavaja, Oosana, Sookbi, Kavi
Daityaguru, Sita, ee vames for Sukra, (!enus).

7. Chayatmaja, Panga, Yama, Arkaputra, Kona, Asita,
Souri, Sani. Neela ae vames for Sani (Satur).

8. Kruru, Krisanga, Kapilaksha. Sarpa, Thama, Asura:
Saimhikeya, Chayagraha. Vidhuntuda, Swarbhanu,
Rakta, Agu, Ahi, Rahu, ere names for Rahn, (Dragon's Héad).

% Ketu, Sikhi, Dwaja, ave venus for Ketu ( Dragons Tail).
Planets are also called Grahas ered Khagas. |

NOTES.

‘These are uuly some of the many names which are frequently used
im the astrological works, and which have their own proper uses
when we enter into their inner meanings. These will be of imménse
use to the student who reads the astrological works in Sanskrit.
Those who read translations of those works are not at present
concerned with these various names. Some of these names have
superficial religious allusion, while others are indicative of
planetary characteristics or their dimensions and forms. In the
Astrological Magazine published by me in Volume 1, I have given
many more names for Mari, and if these are to be explained with
reference to the Bhoutika Su/ras, the work will extend over several
volumes. Each of the letters of these various names, 1s indicative
of the force which combines in the planet and the results of the
cumbination by such union. Such of my readers as are anxious
tu know more dbout them, may be referred to the explanations
which have been viven in my Astrological Magazine. Grahas
ineans those which have gravitation and mutual power of attrac-
tion, from Gruhe to attract. Ahagas mean those which move in
space. Avhw space and Gu means to move. It would be absurd
to ascribe that the knowledge about gravitation and its laws was
due to Sis _Isae Newton’s discovery. Orientalists and Astronomers
cannot commit grander mistakes. The term Grahda, whith has

been used trom the Vedic (and therefore immemorial) time ‘dledity
| OE pipet

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 87] =====
Goop ayy Evin Puaxyrts. ८9

shows the knowledge the ancient Maharishis had about them, long
before Europeans had an existence even as'the most barbarous
nations.

a

देस तस्याहुकिकोधमांदी
यमात्मजःप्राणहखेकति५५५ ।
अधंप्रहारीयमकंटकस्या
दुत्करंतिसं ज्ञः खट्टुकालनामा ।॥७५॥

Svanza 75-

 Gulika ex? Sanisuta ee uames for an Oopagraha., called
Gulika who zs the son of Sani \Saturi) Mandi. Yamatmaja,
Prahahara ed Akpape are names for Mandi. Ardapra-
hara aud Yamakantaka, ere xames for Yamakanutaka- Ootk-
14.11 25 he zame for Kala.
NOTES.

There are some other planets whuse uses and influences are
explained in astrological works, The author askx the readers to
refer to them and find them out. ‘These Oopagrahas or Minor planets
have also an evil influence in the houses they are found to occupy
and they act against the interest of the native in the Bhavas they
denote. Suppose any one of these evil planets is found in the
7th house, which signifies wife, marital happiness, sexual energy
é&c., then there will be great misery from those sources or there
will he danger to those signified by that house.

 

PES
सपापविदरक्षीणदारीसभोम्मदास्तमःकेतुयमात्मजाच्र ।
ररदमेपूर्णरादाङ्कसौम्य देवेज्यशुक्रारशुभदाश्चसीम्याः॥७६

Sranza 76. |
Buda in bad association, weak Chundra, Ravi, Kuja, Sani,
Rahu, Kethu, and Mandi are called Kruras or cruel platets and

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 88] =====
70 SARWARTHAC HIN FAMANI.

Papas or evil ones; well assoctated Buda, fall Chundra, Guru and
Sukra are classed as Soumyas o” Shubhas, ०.५४ disposed or bene-
ftetal planets.

NOTES.

Tius is a very difficult stanza and is very confusing to the
beginner. If a planet is ealled evil, then exaltation means for him
greater power to commit mischief. A rogue armed with deadly
powers will naturally cause greater mischief than one similarly
disposed but without power. A good man without power may
have a sympathetic heart but he will not be able to do any good
unless it be in a very remote way. But if he is armed with large
powers he will try to do much good. World as it is, is a mixture
of good and evil and it is not pussible to have either an entirely
bad man or a thoroughly good man. Planets are not independent
uf each other, whatever may be their tinal source of strength.
Each is influencing the other, and is in its turn, influenced by it.
These mutual intluences are to be found out and reduced to some
formule which will guide mankind in their avocations of life.
Good planets will do good if they ure not otherwise influenced and
evil planets produce evil if they ave not disturbed by external
causes. Apart from the surronuding influences to which all
uvatural phenomena must submit themselves, we can yet classify
objects, as good, bad and indifferent. They have their intrinsic
worth as opposed to what they may possess under external modi-
fying influences. This explains the division into evil and good
planets. Exaltation is « common factor where every planet good
or evil, produces voud, but according to its natural characteristics
which have been separately assigned to it. If Guru is debilitated
we call him evil, but this word evil inust uot be confounded with
the word evil, when we use it about Sani and call him an evil planet.
In the one case a good man, by external influences tends to do evil
modifying it by his own natural gooduess, while in the other a bad
mau, does good modifying it by his own evil tendencies. A strong
man falls sick and is weak; and a weak man takes exercise and
gains strength. There is weakness in both, and there is strength
in both with this difference that natural strength and weakness

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 89] =====
Puanetary CHAkavreRtsittcs. 71

are modified by external circumstances The analogy may not
have been happily expressed but the readers attention is called to
these special differences, which have distinct results attached to
them in the art of making astrological predictions. When Buda
is with good planets, he is good, when he is with bad planets he is.
18. * Moon is called weak when he is close to the Sun, and he is
called Purne or full when he is opposite to the Sun. The deter-
mination of these several sources of strength constitutes the chief
factor for success in the field of predictions and this nice balancing
of evidence can only be perfected by natural ability or genius and
to some extent by learned labour. (Vide. 4s, S. Snstructor
3rd. Ed.),

ER

॥ अथ म्रहखभावगुणानाह ॥
भानु्महोमोंकितवतैखांग
दयामस्सरक्तोपिचर्पिगराक्षः।
पित्तोष्णमूर्तिस्समगात्रय्टि
रारोग्यवात्सत्वगुणोल्परोमा॥ ७७॥ `

Sranza 77.
Planetary Characteristics.

The Sun—irritable, well proportioned. boty, dark-red color, honey
colored eyes, bilious ant hot, healthy, short hairs, moderate size, re-
presents Satwaguna.

i NOTES.

All the planets are given certain characteristics. The. object
in attributing these to the planets seems to be that when the
planets have a strong influence in a horoscope they produce these
results on the person born under their influences. The previous
karmaic results are indicated by the symbolical language used to
represent planetary influences. Different works on astrology
differ to some extent in the delineation of these characteristics
of the planets but so far as Ihave seen there are not very material
differences. Tiong explanatory notes are not required for plain

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 90] =====
72 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

language. When the Sun is powerful in a horoscope the person
hecomes influential, bold, commands respect and political success.

i

चन्द्रस्सितांगस्सममात्रवकरो
वाग्मीपरिष्वंभविवे कर. th: |
co a ~ तचवातयक्त
7 ([चत्छटारडातन््वातकु
स्सत्वा सोदादद्ददोद कः ॥७८॥

Sranza 78. र

Moon—fair complexion, average height, sweet agreeable speech,
lean but rounded body, watery and windy temperament, Satwaguna,
and Sanguine turn of mint.

NOTES.

When the Moon is full he will produce generally an agreeable
and handsome person. When he is weak or New Moon he pro-
duces contrary results. The Sun, Moon and Jupiter are govern-
ing Satwaguia. .Bhaguradgitu and other eminent Hindu religious
works divide human disposition under three principal heads, they
are Satwa, Rajas,and Thamas. The words are highly suggestive.
Satwa. represents all goodness and God himself is the fountain for
this Guna. Rajas represents worldly courage, refined taste, mili-
tary propensity, and ideas of position and respect. Thamas
represents all evil and mischievous tendencies, laziness, rogues
and all sorts of vagabonds.

St

कोपाथिनेजस्सितररूगा्ः
पिच्रात्मकध्र॑चखबुद्धियुक्तः

 . प द्दद्् Tear
ममःप्रतपीवहुवीर्यरोखः।+७९।

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 91] =====
Kea axp Bupa. 73

Stanza 79

Mars —represents bloodred eyes wi-k anger, whitish red coneplexion,
biktous, fickle-minded, well proportioned body, tudicates Thamasaguna
entelhgent and bold, warlike, and licentious.

NOTES.

Kuja represents physical strengh, he is bold adventurous, in-
dependent, fond of most daring deeds, fond of women and very
capricious. In body‘he is fair and red complexioned and every
part of his person is admirably «proportioned He is a fiery and
hot planet and governs all military operations. There is very
little of gnana in him—superior wisdom pertaining to God. Slight
differences in astrological authors about his complexion and per-
‘son are found. He is represented as blood red, generous and
having great strength with slight waist by Varahamihira,

 

नल

वि रयामाद्वस्यलयेत्तिदिटान्‌

| THN HAA STATS: |
हासप्रिय ःपित्तकफानिरात्मा

| सद्यःप्रतापीबहुपुं्वलीशः॥ <० ॥ il
Sranza_ 80
Mercury (Buda)—-greenish complexion, much learning, represents
Rajasaguna, excellent advice, fond of wit and humour, mixture

of all temperaments, enthusiastic but casily cowed down, keeping cont-
pany with women of evel repute

4
क? ५ ८ १.८ ५ क ya

Buda produces a very handsome and attractive person: al-
though not of a fair व्व He is the lor of allintelligence
and memory and gives great tagte forthe pursuit of sublime sub-
jects like astronomy, astrology, and physical sciences. He also com-
mands extraordinary skill in arts and manufactures, He is obliging,
very courteous and yery enthusiastic in the commencement. When.

10

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 92] =====
॥

74 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT. {4

he is favourable and joins Guru he commands great personal influ-
ence and unrivalled intellectual position. Whem he is unfavourable
he makes a man !forgetful, crackish, perversely witty and-a dis-
agreeable companion.

वृहस्पतेस्तुङगतनुस्सु ण्यः
BRAGS CE |
संत्वाश्रयस्सव, गाभिरामः

॥

पिद्गक्षकेदा्वगुरूः क।4।- ॥ ८१॥
741९4 81.

Fupiter—Stout and fair body, virtuous, pklegmeatic, represents
Satvaguna, ééessed with all good character, kolden-colored eyes
and hairs, learned tn all the shastras, clever Speech,

NOTES.

Guru represents education while Buda indicates intelligence.
If these join together, or occupy kendras they make the person
well edueated and highly intelligent. Guru tepresents all that is
good. His color is excellent being bright and deep golden-yellow,
a handsome, but stout body, excellent sight and speech, splendid
moral nd spiritual character, a generous and forgiving disposition
and love for all which tends to hel p humanity both in this and in
the after life. His aspect averts many evils, his conjunction
produces much good and in every way Guru stands foremost in
the planetary ranks as the most principled and the most beneficial
planet, |

 

Si

खल्पारानस्याप्सुजिदर्थकाम €
. ` स्सुखीक्छीकांतियुतशवसुंदरः ।
`, `जनाडवक्राचिततेमः क्तो

। , . : स्जोगुणर्स+ नाभिरामः ॥ ८२ ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 93] =====
Surra axp Sant 75.

Stanza 82 [र
Venus—poor eater, fond of various things, strong and very
handsome body, charming appearance, dark curly hairs, fine eyes;
excellent qualities, governs Rajasaguna, happy.
NOTES.
Venus. when strongly situated, gives a very agreeable perso-
nality and mind. Sukra governs all wordly concerns. He represents
wife, passions, cupidity, refinement, agreeable manners and excep-
tional worldly enjoyment. He governs paintings, sweet scents, horsed
and carriages, wife’s and his own morals and sexual passions, a love
for sublime themes and in fact all that is desirable to make a man
happy in this world. He governs Rajasaguna and therefore is not
80 pious as his rival Deva Guru. Although thoroughly worldly he
is not entirely sensual, as later on in his life he makes the native
to see to his future and inclines him to meditate upon god. Sukra
is a planet of extremely good taste and when he occupies the 4th
house unaspected by evil planets and aspected by good ones he
will make the native the leader of fashions, a model to imitate
for taste and refinement in the selections of furniture, houses, gar=
dens, carriages and other worldly objects. When Venus is unfavor-
able or debilitated, he plunges the native into wtter sensuality,
gratifying his senses without reference to morals or reputation.
Vile women, low drinks, bestial pleasures, undignified company;
reckless gambling, and disgraceful acts” are some of the events
which blacken the native’s career. In the horoscopes of women
he will produce when bad, much immorality, but refined and

courteous manners.

 

MELT ATT:
Riera . -
स्थुलदिजस्तामसबुषठियक्तो
वातात्मकोवाक्षठिनोतिदीनः ॥ ८२ ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 94] =====
76 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI-

Sraxza 88

Saturi—Lazy, uninclined to enter on active service, lean ang
zall body, yellowish eyes, vough hairs, eruci and tyrranicad, long and

ugly teeth, windy temperament, harsh latruage, governs Thamasa-.
guna, humble-niinded.

NOTES

Saturnine influence can be easily distinguished from the influ-
ences of other planets; those who are tall, slender built, lazy,
darkish, with rough hairs all over their body with ugly or illset
teeth may at once be placed under Saturnine influence and very
rarely the prediction fails. When Saturn occupies or aspects tho
Lagna or Chundra, these qualities will be most prominent, if he
is nob aspected by any fair planet like the Moov, Venus or Jupi-
ter. When any of these planets aspects Saturn, some of these quali-
ties will be present although the person may appear fair or hand-
some. Saturn also makes a person prematurely old and greyheaded
Persons born in Makara and Kumbha, will also be tall, darkish and
irritable. They will have many ups and downs in life. They will
be imperious, and generally inclined to be tyrranical
PES ——

जंतिर्िषतप्प्यसाक्रिपात
विषखभावोबहुपापमूर्तिः ।
तत्ाभ्निकेजन्मनितहूणांस्तु॥ ८४ ॥

 

Sraxza $4

Mandi—Fearful and ugly, eccentric and fitful, generally fond
of evil deeds and low company. When the planets are strong either
in Jataka ov Prasna ed/ these chavactertstecs must be predicted,
but when they are weak traces of thpms, may be foretold.

NOTES.

Mandi is one of the Oopagrahas and several eminent authors

have not spoken about his anfvenge rer, theg.of ether subordinate

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 95] =====
PLaNetarny Castes. 77

planets. The author of Sarwarthachintomani lays much stress up-:
on these Oopagrahas, It is left.ta the readers to take these :in--
fluences.or not ag he. pleases. Vasista; Gargi, Parasara, Vyasa;
Varabamihira, Satyacharya, and many other eminent astrologers
and astronomers do. not include the influences of these subordinate.
planets and I thigk, predictions may be safely. based upon con-.
sideration of the seven pringipal planets. even without reference to
Rahu and Kethu. But I appear here.as, a trauslator and I must
give out what, Venkatase speaks himself in. -his learned work.
When the influences of Oopagrahas have to be predicted it must
be carefully noted, that the principal planets are not strong and
do not appose or counteract the influences, of the minor planets.

~^ -+----- 1

॥ अथग्रहजात्यादिभेवानाह ॥
विप्रौभवेतांगुरुवानवेद्यौ
दिनेशभौमोनरपालमुख्यौ। `
सोमद्विदवेशयकुखः सतौ
दिनेशयुक्रस्तुच, वर्णैः ॥ ८५ ॥

Sraxza 8d. |||

I shatl now explain the castes of the planets.

Fupiter aut Venus vepresent.. Brahma, Mars and the Sun
indicate the Kshatryas, the Meor'ned Mercury pepresent the Vaisyas,
Saturn vepresents the Sudra LES SCS 0 ae

There is some différetod शि तकण among the
writers on astrology,, Tbe RRS SPAT Ps Fsy 2 and Sudra,
classifications are representative of the various functions dis-
charged by the members of a united society aod when this stanza is
applied to other than Hindu Nations, who.have none of these
castes in name, although.all of them have them in- true spirit, it may
be interpreted to indicate the avecations followed by the different

५१०१७ +

oO es

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 96] =====
78 SAkWARTHACHINTAMANI.

members of that society. All those persons in any society, whe-
ther caste system prevails there in name or not, who are engaged in
meditation an God, whe are working. in the cause of God and who
transact charitable or philanthropic work, may bé classed as the
highest, because, they work in a rdoral and spiritual plane, which is
considered to be the highest among all nations, whatever may be
the pretensions to civilisation aad modern enlightenment. The next
claes is the martial. The fighting races have always been honored
from time immemorial, althongh they come next after moral and
intellectual classes. On the Karth they represent the highest physical
energy and temporal power and also develope many solid virtues
when properly cuntrolled. These are under the special influences of
the Sun and Mars. The Sun represents all kingly power and Mars
governs all military classes, The Ms [3 and Mercury Chandra and
Buda come in the next rdet, which’ fepresents all mercantile and
banking activities. nine cide अवृष्यः द the earlier stages of
the Hindu Society and even now the Indian Chetty and the Dunya
are illustrations of Lunar awd Mereurial inflnences. Saturn repre-
sents all the working, (44 ting and labouring classes and these
are generally Sudras {i Initia and workmen elsewhere. When
these planets shed their respegtive influences, they produce strong
inclinations in the Natives to take to the kind of work which
is represented by the planet in particular.

Sa

चण्डाखजातिःकिरसेरिःकेयः

aed {कन्य £ ARN aA
उरवसह्कयः-- ब्रातमान्का t
भूमादयेन्पेः.+षरोमजातयो
वणाभिभानित्वश्तोिव्णः ॥ ८६ ॥

 

 

Sranza 86.

Raku represents all Pariah classes, Kethu and Mandi vepre-
sent atl other lower castes and Doomadi planets indicate all topsy
turuy or hybyid. and lowthsome sects.’ The planets indicate their ine

JStuences aud have. ne tastes among themselves. |||

~

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 97] =====
aI
©

Pranervary Casrrs.

0788

This is really an interest} ng stanza: Planetary rays are very
remarkable in the production-of terrestrialphenomeua. The rays
are not puré ant कण्ण Phey are modified, reflected refiacted,
and counteracted. Jn a e states we have reasons for the. pro-
duction’ of tHe! woudemar  phohonte: Hi id ‘the world. | Various
religions, various s@cts, various castes and various creeds, have
been called into existence and have been destroyed by the in-
fluence of the all powerful Time. Who gives us Time, who enables
us to know Time, who records the Zime and who is the Final
Cause for all Time? God is invisible and cannot be understood
by the undeveloped senses of ordinary men. But-even the most
ignorant fool, who does not know-his. alphabet, knows that: ¢He
glorious Sun and Moon and other planets are the causes of all
earthly phenomena, He knows these influences because he sees
them, feels them, works under them, guides his movements within
their control and argues, it may be in the rudest manner possible,
that without the influences of the planets above, he and all his
creatures who keep company with him in this world, could not
liveeven fora single moment. ‘This is science grand and pure enough,
and ought to be simple enough. These countless rays of the
planets are doing their work—distributing and redistributing
matter—in nature and these rays produce an endless variety of
castes and creeds whether we call them so by names or not. Jn-
clination to work, tastes and dislikes, birth, breeding and edu~
cation, coupled with the seed and bed where persons: have taken
their rise, determine to a great extent the lot of these people.
Where socjety, has existed long, these, take a steriotyped form and
where,it is in new formation the castes are split up inte number-
less new ones. ‘hese remarks hold good for all ages and for all
nations. Ifa Lord does not admit the plebian to his dinner-table
he does so under his caste ४ nly he does not call it caste,
but calls if SIS" Basu ttipuctid Whbbeter we mhy understand by
that term,

3

7
. २ ~ . ॥ ॥ न ष
य ~ का

"~ ~~~
~

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 98] =====
80 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

॥ ्रहवणानाह ॥

रक्तशवेतोतिर्क्तो रितकनकभाधित्रनीरादिनाधाः।

वहधापस्त्व्धिजाताहरि रगणरादहिद्रमार्यानजाताः॥ <७॥
Stanza 87 |

f shall wow give colors ttty ¢ planets. , The Sun ts red, the Moon
zs ‘white, Mars s’blood-ved or Ve, ‘Mercury 25 green Fupiter ts
goldenyéllow, Venus 1s variagated and Saturn is ‘black

Fhe: Stet represents Firegod,' Moon indisates weiter, Mars shows
Kumaraswami, Mercury represents Vishnu, Fupeter refers to
Jndra, Yowns exetcates Sachi Devi, cd Satirn represents Brahma-

||| |||. ।,/> ~. ||| || |||

‘Tu the thatter of colors reprdsented by planets, slight differ.
-ences may be'found in the astrological works. The Sun indicates
copper color, Moon is white’ ‘like. silver, Mars is bloodred or
scarlet, and indicatés dahgers, dnd sanguine temperament. Mercury
represents greenness indicating much wit and humour, Jupiter
represents the finest golden yellow and safety to all beings who
are under his sway. Venus shows great variety of colors and
therefore very fine taste, ‘an@ Saturn shows blackness or misery and
death. Then the author mentions what are Galled the ddhi Devatas
for these planets. The Sun'represents the Fire God (Power), Moon
shows the Water Power, Mars shows Kumarswami or the Fighting
“Power, Mercury represents Vishnu or protecting Power, dupiter
represents Indra or Governing Power, Venus indicates Sachi or

spouse of Indra-and Saturn represents the-ereative Power Brahma,

Ee
भादः काव्योषराभूरगरुम्ननिशसशिन स्तनः -गभरेव्यो ज्ञेया
स््ताद्तिएाः कियक्कभिथुनसशयस्तेनचान्द्राः।॥ ८८॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 99] =====
Directions Goverxen py PLavets. 81

Sravza 88

The Sux governs East, Venus vules South East, Mars indicates
South, Rah represents South West, Saturn shows West, the Moon
governs North West, Mercury vules North and Fupiter zudicates

th East. Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer, with their Thrikonas
represent Last, South, West and Novth respectively

NOTES
The first portion of the stanza is simple enough. In the
Dasas and Bhukties as well as in queries about thieves, lost pro-
perty, enemies,and runaway persons, this stanza will be extreme-
ly useful as indicating the direction which they take or its boun-
daries. They also shew where a person will be transferred to or
where he will be successful if he entered into some speculations.
When planets indicate cardinal directions, the Zodiacal signe also
must signify for their own values in thisconnection. Aries and its”
two Thrikonas, ic., 5th and 9th houses or Leo and Sagittarius
shew the Kast. Taurus and its Trines Virgo and Capricornus
indicate the Sunth. Gemini and its Trines Libra and Aquarius
represent the West and Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces govern the
North. These signs also serve the same purpose as the directions
indicated by the planets.
ES

्षणेदुमूसूनदिनिशमन्दाः
पापाबुधस्तत्सहितस््तपापः।
नपुंसकोसोम्यदिनेदापुतोौ
शशांकशुक्रोयुवतीचशेषाः ॥ ८९ ॥
नरमहौभार्तुकुजाभरेज्या
स्सूतोवल्छातततप्रवदान्तितदूज्ञाः।
भौमस्यमल्लापिवसागुरोस्त॒
शुक्रमृगोस्त्वक्टाशिनेदेनस्य ॥ ९० ॥

11

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 100] =====
82 SanwARTHACHINTAMANI.

चन्दरस्यरक्तदिनपस्यचास्थि सरायुच्छानेधातुवशादुपांधः `
तद्धातुकोषान्मरणंप्रयाति रंघरस्थितानामिदहखेचराणां ॥ ९१ ॥

Sranzas 89, 90 & 91.

leak Moon, Mars, Sun, Saturn ant batly associated Mercury are
classed as evil planets (Papagrahas). Mercury and Saturn are eunuchs.
Fenus and Moon are females The Sun, Mars and Fupiter are males.
These planets indicate corresponding despositions in horoscophy as
wedl as ix horary. Mars governs marrow, Fupiter rules the brain ;
Sukra tndicates the semin or vital flued; Mercury governs the skin;
Aloon rules over the blood, The Sun has jurisdicticn over the bones.
Saturn governs the nervous system, The diseases of the person or his
health depends upon the strength of the planets and the organte mat-
ters they govern, The person dies from the tnflamation or disorder
ascribed to that planet which occupies the 8th house from his birth.
In enjoying health similar considerations apply to planetery character-
252८5.

NOTES,

Moon is called Kshina waning when he is 5 days forwards and
backwards from New Moon, He then will produce evil as does any
other evil planet. From the loth of the waxing half of the lunar
month to the Sth of the waning half of the lumar month the Moon
is said to be full. On the rest of the days he is moderate in
strength, Ravi, Sani, and Knja are evil planets. Where pla-
nets are strong and influence the native, the person partakes
of their masculine, feminine or neuter gender. The passions
of the person will be according to the strength of the planets.
In Prasna the gender of the planet determines the sex of the
thief or those who are concerned with the work. Rahu and
Kethu have been omitted by this author. Rahu represents femi-
nine sex, Kethu denotes a eunuck. In the formation of the fea-
tug in the womb and its developement during the nine months, it
is there the influences of the plancts have a great deal to do. At
the time of the sexual functions; the Lord who causes the ejection

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 101] =====
Nature, Sex axp Diseases of PLaxets, 88

of the fliid into the female recepticle is Sukra. Sukra in Sanskrit
means semin and the sexual correspondence is brouzht about by
Kuja and Chundra, one representing fire or heat and the cther
representing water or cold. Where the Sun is very strong the
person will have stout bones ; if otherwise he will have rotten or
ill-developed bones, where the Moon is powerful the man will have
good and sufficient quantity of blood. If Kujais strong he will have
pleanty of marrow which gives strength to the bones, where Budha
is Strong he will have good skin, if Guru is exalted he developes a
spleudid brain, if Sukra is favourable he will have plenty of sexual
passion and seminal fluid, if Sani is auspicious the nervous system of
the person will be strong. These characteristics of the planets will
be useful not only in consultations of horoscopes, but also ina variety
of other questions relating to various matters connected with human
life. At the time of death or disease the pain and the difficulty
arises in that organ or sense of the body which is attributed to the
influence of the planet whichis unfavorable or which causes Mura-
ka. In dasas and bukthies, if planets are evil, they give complaints
in those parts and senses which they govern, It has been stated
‘elsewhere that the 8th house represents marana or death. If at
‘the time of birth the planets oecupy the 8th house from it they deter-
‘mine the mode and the time of his death; if there areno planets in
the 8th house the death has to be determined by that complaint
which is attributed to the Lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
Lord of the Sth house. If there are more thau one planets in the
8th house then the death will be from that disease which is attri-
buted to the strongest of the planets. If all the plancts are equal
in strength in the 8th house death will result from a complication
of diseases which are ruled by those planets. If Rabu or Kethu
occupies the Sth honse they give death’ from that disease which is
governed by the Lord of the 8th or thatof the planet which aspects
the 8th. Deaths from violence or poisons may also be predicted
by the occupation of the 8th house by Rahu or‘Kethu.

9 ~+ `

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 102] =====
vt Sanwa RTHACHINTAMANI.

1 अथग्रहस्थानानि ॥
देवस्थानंभास्करस्यांबुवास
शन्द्रस्याथिस्थानसङ्गारकस्य।
क्रीडास्यानैसोमपुत्रस्यकोग
स्थानंजीवस्यैवमाहुर्भुगोस्तु ॥ ९२ ॥

सुषिस्थानंभावुजस्योषधंतु
सर्पस्थानंसेहिकफेयस्येचेवम्‌।
वध्यस्थानंमन्दसूनो ःप्रदिष्ं

स्थानान्यन्वान्येवर द्यानिसद्धिः ॥ ९३ ॥ .
Sranzas 92 & 98.

The Sun governs places of worshipr or temples. Moon rules over
bath vooms, tanks, wells and other watery surfaces, Kuja rules all
jive places, engines, armories, Buda governs places of sexual inter-
course. Gurie rules over treasuries and places where money ts depo-
sitex. Sukra governs bed rooms. Sant riles over hospttals and medt-
cal stores. Rahu indicates places where serpents and other reptiles
hide themsekes. Mandz indicates locakties of death or execution.

NOTES.
The author by suggesting so on in his work indicates the kind
of places governed by these planets aud which are too numerous.
to be detailed here.

+~
जीर्णशने्वासरनायकस्य
स्थूलंगुरो्मध्यमकंभूगेस्वु ।
काठिन्यमजस्यवुनूतनैवित्‌
दिनंङ्जस्यामिदतेचरक्तं ॥ ९४॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 103] =====
w
qi

Mertans AnD CLoTHES GoverneD by PLaNets.

कंथाफणीद्रस्यतुचित्रवासः केतोर्महाकचरमेवमान्देः।
महार्घंमाहुबडिनोबलस्य हीन॑बुधावर्णविव्जितंच ॥ ९५ ॥

Stanzas 94 & 95.

Saturn governs all vags, torn and old clothes. The Sun commands
vough clothes. Fupiter shows neither old nor new clothes. Venus
indicates strong clothes. The Moon goverus white and new elothes
Mars rules partly burnt and red clothes. Mercury represents wet
and torn clothes. Rahu governs several clothes stitched up tcgether
Kethu indicates vartegated or many colored clothes, and Mandi rules
dirty clothes. If planets are powerful, the clothes of the class tnai-
cated by the planets will be valuable, If the planets are weak or
unfavorable they will be valueless. (e.g.) Lf Moon is unfavorable
he gives an ordinary white cloth of very lttle value, tf he ts favorable
or exalted he gives white clothes but laced or silk, of a costly nature.
Lf Raku is favorable he gives wice velvet,damask or silk pieces stitched
together. If he is unfavorable he gives all dirty clothes stitched toge-
ther. Stmilarly for other planets

i -

॥ अथय्रदाणांखोहाः ॥
ताग्रदिनेशस्यनिराकरस्य . `
मणिर्हिरण्यंतुधरासुतस्य ।
शुक्तिर्विदेदेवगुरोस्तुरोप्यं
सुक्ताभुगोरायसमर्कसूनो : ॥ ९६॥
राहोर् सीसद्धिखिनष्यनेल्यं
< रामार्णितत्कथयंतितदज्ञा
मन्दात्मजस्यापिचमिश्रद्गधं
खोहस्यकिरटेत्रपुरामनंति ॥९७ ¶॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 104] =====
86 SanwarnrHachINTAMANt.

Sranzas 96 & 97
Suu governs copper, Moon'*gems, Mars gold, Mercury brass and

bell metal and sa forth, Fupiter silver, Venus pearls, Saturn tron.
Rahu lexd, Kethu dark metals, Mandi trou lead aut other metalic

Ores.
NOTES.

There is difference in the metals ascribed to the planets by
this author and Varahamihira and others. In Laghu Jataka of
Varahamira, Chapter 1V, Verse Ii, he aseribes gold to Jupiter
when he is in his own house and in Brahat-Jataka in Chapter IT
Verse 12, he ascribes lead to Sani and omits Rahu and Kethu alto-
gether. Vyasa is of the same opinion. Strong planets give gains
from these sources and weak planets inflict loss.

ee ---~

॥ अथग्रहाणाम्‌ृतवः ॥
भृगोर्वसंतःक्षितिस नुभान्वो
अरीष्मरशादांकस्यःनतुप्रवषः।
विददरारदेवगुरोस्तुदेमं

ततुदशनेस्याच्छिशिरश्कारः ॥ ९८ ॥

Stanza GS.

Sukra represents Vasanta Ruthw, Surya and Kuja represent
Grishmaruthu, Chundra represents Varasha Rathu, Budha repre-
sents Savathruthu, Guru represents Flemantharuthu, Sani represents
Stsararutht.

NOTES. `
The Hindu astronomers divide the year into Six Ruthus of two
months each. Vasantha represents Summer. Grishma represents
windy season, Varsht ‘méarts rain; Sarathruthu represents fruit-
ing season, Hemantha indiates co and Sesira tepresents spring.
St al) a eed

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 105] =====
Srasoxs, Tasres anp Ties oF i LANETS. 87
द्रेक्ाणयेस्तद्वतवं-स्‌ वाच्यं
प्भनेप्रसूतावपिनष्टसंज्ञे ।

॥ रव्यादीनां रसानिर्णयः ॥
भानोःकटुभूमिसुतस्यतिक्तं
सोमस्यतावछछवणंविदस्तु ।
मिश्चीकर्तैवस्तुसुरेज्यभुग्वों
मौधुर्यमाम्खैचरानेःकषायः ॥ ९९॥
ऋतुत्रयवासरनायकस्य
क्षणंशशांकस्यदिनंकुजस्य ।
विदोर्तुरदैवगुरोस्तुमासः
पक्षोभूगेवत्सरमकंसूनाः ॥ १००॥
अष्टौतुमासास्तुहिनांशुराघ्रोः
केतोस्तुमासच्रयमेव्रकाः ।
सा्धघौब्दमादुर्यमनन्दनस्य

प्र्रादिचिंतासुविचित्यमेतत्‌ ॥ १०१॥

Sranzas 99, 100 & 101. ॥ |

These Ruthus are to be found in birth or lost horoscopes or
questions on losses tn property by the DrakRana which rises at the
zine of birth or question. Ravi governs pungent or hot tastes, Chan-
dra shows saltish tastes, Kuja rutes bitter, Buda governs shadrasas.
Guru represents sweet, Sukra indicates sour taste, and Sane rules
acidity. Ravi indicates 6 months, Chandra a few minutes, Kuga
denotes one day, Buda shows two months, Guru represents one month,
Sukva indicates a fortnight, and Sani represents one year, Rahu
indicates eight months, Kethu denotes three months ane Mandi indicates
eighteen months. These are to be used in the Prasna.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 106] =====
88 SamwaRTHACHINTAMAS!.

NOTES.

There is a separate chapter devoted at the end of Brihatjataka
wherein the processes for calculating the Nasta Jataka or loss of
property questions, are élaborately given. As the whele question
involves a series of calculations I would refer my readers to my
Astrological Self Instrueter or to the Brihatjataka. In some edi-
tions of Sarwarthachintamani, Mantantara or separate doctrines on
these points are given. I do not think that they are necessary
here. In thischapter most of these preliminaries are given with a
view to guide the student in the art of predicting all events
connected with the life of a Native. Whenthe planets are strong
these peculiarities in taste are noticeable, but when they are weak
they show perhaps some traces of their existence. When a ques-
tion is put to an astrologer about loss of property or person or when
any event is to happen and the time at which it is likely to happen,
the periods mentioned against these planets will be the extent within
which, if favourable, they will announce success.

at

॥ धात्वादिषिषयभरहनिणयः ॥

मूरखयहोशुक्रदिनाधिनाथौ ।
जीवप्रहौजीवराशांकसून्‌
मेपादिदस्राद्यिधाक्रमेण ॥ १०२ ॥

21457 102.

Raku, Sanz, Chandra and Kuja denote Dhatus. Suéra and
Ravz represent Moolas, ant Guruand Buda tiudticate Jeevas, From
Mesha and Aswint, these are regularly to be calculated.

NOTES.

The whole terrestrial phenomena is divided into 3 grand
divisions mineral, vegetable and animal. This was thoroughly
known to the ancients. Dhatoos represent minerals, Moolas show
vegetables and Jeeves represent animals including men, In all

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 107] =====
Mixerat, VeGrrabhe AND AxiMAL Kinapoms. 39

queries, the astrologer has to find out what is the object of the
question and whether it will be successful. The query may be
about marriage, education, loss of property or person, death,
children, money or other speculation and gardening or cultivation.
hese are uot exclusive of each other. When a man asks the
astrologer about loss of money the object fails under mineral.
When a question is put about the health of a person the object
falls under animal. And when he questions about the growth
of a garden the object is vegetable. In the latter portion of the
sloka the author gives a hint as to which of the Zediacal signs,
are Dhatoos, which are Moolas and which are Jeevas. Mesha
Cataka, Tuula and Makara or all the movable signs represent Dhatoos
(minerals’. Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika and Kumbha or the fired
sizus represent Moolas (vegetables). Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanas
and Meena or thecommon signs indicate Jeevas (animals). Ina similar
way take the constellations. Aswini, Rohini, Poonarvasu, Makha,
Hasta, Visakha, Moola, Sravana, Poorvabhadra or the Ist, 4th,
?th, 10th, 8th, 26th, 19th, 22nd and 25th represent Dhetoos.
Bharani, Mrugasira, Pooshyami, Poobba, Chitta, Anooradha,
Poorvashadia, Dhanista and Oottarabhadra or 2nd, 5th, 8th, 11th,
j4th, 17th, 20th, 28rd and 26th constellations represent Moolas.
And Krittika, Auridra, Auslasha, Oottara, Swati, Jaista, Oottara-
shadha, Satablisha and Ravati or the 3rd, 6th, 9th, 12th, 15th,
18th, 2ist, Sith, and 27th constellations represont Jeeves.

५
--- <

 

॥ अथग्रहदष्टिनिर्णयः ॥ `
अयोर््वदृष्टोदिननाथभौमो
दष्िकटाक्षेणकवीदुखनोः
VTA ASS
रर्घोक्षिपातस्त्वहिनाथरान्योः ॥ १०३ ॥

19
12

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 108] =====
९५) SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

Stanza 103,

Auja and Ravi have uppersight (Oordwa), Sukra and Buda have
sutesight (Kataksha), Guru and Chandra have ordinarysight (Sama),
and Rahw and Sant have half opened sight (Ardhoksht.)

NOTES.

Sights are most peculiarly arranged and we witness a variety
of sights among men. Some generally look up while speaking,
some look down, some always look with half shut eyes, some
have squintjeyes, and others look askance through the end of their
eyes. The sights ascribed to the planets must be predicted if they
are strong in a horoscope and their traces if they are weak.

~“ ज
TRH HTT GAETA ATTA TATE:

जीवस्िकोणंमदनंचसर्वेपरयंतिटृश्याचरणाभिवृद्या॥ १०२॥

Stanza 104.

Sutura aspects 3rd and roth powerfully, Mars aspects 4th and
Sin powerfully and Fupiter aspects the 5th and oth powerfully,
while the vest of the planets aspect the 7th powerfully. All planets
aspect 3rd and loth with quarter sieht. 5th and oth with half sight
and sthand 8th with threeguarter sight and the pthwtth full sight.

 

NOTES.

All planets aspect the 7th house fully, 4th and 8th houses with
8 sight, 5th and 9th houses with 4 sight, and 8rd and 10th with
ith sight. But in these aspects there is much difference. Satur-
nine rays powerfully aspect the 3rd and 10th and his aspect in the
"th is very ordinary, not so strong as the sight of others there.
Jupiter aspects the 5th and 9th more powerfully than he aspects
the 7th and Mars aspects the 4th and 8th more powerfully than
he does the 7th house. The rest of the planets, Moon, Mercury,
Sun and Venus aspect strongly the 7th house. In plain language,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 109] =====
Piaxetary Aspects aNxp Friexpsatr. 91

the aspecting influences of tho planets are thus indicated. Sun,
Moon, Mereury and Venus have to be noted in their aspects of
the 7th, while Mars shows his influeace in the 4th and 8th, Saturn
in the 38rd and 10th and Jupiter in the 5thand 9th houses. Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn also aspect the 7th but net to any powerful
extent.

॥ अथम्रहाणांमित्रामित्रनिणंयः ॥
भानोस्तुमित्राणिकुजंदु जीवा
स्समोवुधदर कलनीतपतो ।
इ्ठौरारांकस्यदिनेशसौम्यौ
दोषास्समामूमिसुतख्ययेत्राः ॥ १०५ ॥

Stanza 105.

L shall now explain planetary friendship aud enmity.

Kuja, Chandra and Guru ave friends to Ravi, Buda is ordy-
nary. Sukvaand Sani are enemies, Ravi and Buda are friends
to Chandra, and the rest, Guru, Kuja, Sant and Sukva are Samas
or ov@inary'.

NOTES.

The author has elsewhere clearly stated that the results
indicated by the planets are not to be supposed to apply to the
planets themselves but to those objects which are subjected to
their influences. The Sun is the friend of Moon, Jupiter and
Mars. It does not mean that they often meet, have food and
exchange courtesies as we do. All that is to be understood by
that expression will be that the Sun’s rays are not counteracted
by those planets which are declared to be his friends, but on the
other hand his rays will be intensified ‘by the ‘rays of Mars,
Moonand Jupiter. Samas are those planets which ueither‘retard,.
nor extinguish the rays of the other planets.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 110] =====
92 SABWARTHACHINTAMANI.

By enmity we have to understand that the rays of the one
planet will be counteracted by those of the other which is declared
to be hisenemy. The anticipated results are therefore negatived
by. the conjunction or asp2cting of the unfriendly planets, It is
specially to be noted that while all other planets than the Moon
have the three states of friendship, nentrality and enmity, thé Moon
has no enemies. Others haye the Moon as their enemy but the
Moon has other planets as friends or as neutrals.

uN

रवीदुःजीवाश्बुधध्वशत्

TANGA MSG ATT |
सोम्यस्यमित्रेदिननाथशुक्रो
शेषास्समारा्निकरस्सपल्नः ॥ १०६ ॥

 

74५24 106.

(1 1/1
Fenus ave neutrals and Mereury ts anenemy. The Sun and Venus
are friends of Mercury, Mars, gupiter, and Saturn ave neutrals,
sete tte Moon ts an cnemy,

NOTES.

There are planets who own two signs in the Zodiac while
some oWn only one house. The Sun and Moon own only one
house cach. While Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Mercury and Mars
own each two houses. Friendship is generated by the triangular
theory of planetary influences explained by me in the Astrological
Magazine. Take any sign in the Zodiac. ‘The Lord of that house
will be a friend of the Lords of the houses which fall on the
angles of an equilateral triangle formed from that house. Those pla-
nets who own, other howses are.his'enemies. Take the sion Aries.
Its Lords Mars-1 Tf we draw.lings of an equilateral triangle from
AVERB, te toach eq bth. house from Aries, and Sacittarins, 9th
heskaand idnjes agnindth fpem that Sth house. Therefore the ancles
of an equilateral triang¥e-ang placed .in Aries, Leo and Sacittarins

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 111] =====
Frigvossie Awone tim PraNxers. 98

or 120° apart. The Zodiacal circle represents 360°. The Lords of
Ari-s, Leo and Sagittarius.— Mars, the Sun and Jupiter ure friends.
Take Taurus, Drawing the lines of an equilateral triangie, we
touck Virgo, Capricorn and Taurus, and the lords of these houses
Mercury, Saturn and Venus are friends as owning the angular
houses of an equilateral triangle formed from Taurus and touching
Virgo and Capricorn, Similarly. examine for other houses and

planets.
ric --

 शुकरेदजोवेवगुरोस्सपलतौ मित्राणिसर्वैरविजस्तुमध्यः।
दानींदुजाविष्टकरोभूगेस्तुरोषास्सपत्राश्चसमौकु जेज्यो ॥१०७॥॥

Sranza 107. ||| |
Guru has Ravi, Chandra and Kuja as friends. Sukra and

Buda areenemtes and Sani isSama. Sukra has Saut and Buda
as friends. Kuja and Guru are neutrals and Ravi and Chandra

Qre CNEL US.
NOTES.

On this point of friendship, neutrality and enmity 1 11221.
refer my readers to my book entitled the Astrological Self Ins-
tructor 3rd Edition. I have there elaborately explained these

relationships.
ae
सोरस्यमित्रेटगुपुत्रसौम्यौ
समो रुस्तेनिंखिखीस्सपत्नाः।
राहोस्तुमि्राणिकंयीज्यमदाः
केतोस्तथेकपरवर्दसितदन्ञाः ॥ १०८ ॥
Stanza 108. SMe, MH elie

Buda and Sukra are friends of Saiz. , Ravi, Chandra, and Kuja

७ = } G ५ # ॥ १ 73 . + 5 GC oP
are enénites of Sant.’ Guru ts nektral. Rahu has Sukra,Guru and

Sani as friends. Kethu has Sukra, Sant aud Gyru as friends.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 112] =====
94 SARWARTHACHINTAMANE

NOTES.

The author’ does not say who are enemies and who are neu-
trals to Rahu and Kethu. A fair inference may be drawn, how-
ever, based upon a genoral knowledge of astrology. Rahu and
Kethu are classed as low caste planets and evil in nature. Buda
and Kuja are evil planets and when they are not treated as their
friends they may safely be classed as neutrals at least. Ravi and
Chandra are the declared enemies of Rahu and Kethu. Because
these latter planets eclipse the former ones and thus put them in-
to a shade. There are many complications in these friendships
of planets, into the details of all of which it is undesirable for me to
go deeply. The facts above given show permanent or Nisargika
friondship and enmity. Whai will be given below, will show the
temporary or Thatkaliku friendship. Persons may be inveterate ene-
mies, but cireumstances may compell them to act in union against a
third or common enemy when he is close at hand, and thus for a
time forget or forgive their individual misunderstandings and
hatred.

i
wales eae AT
स्सवेचवाक्सोवरबन्धुयुक्ताः ।
खखात्करमादयुत्रमतस्तथैव
मन्यस्थितास्तत्समयारिभूताः॥ १०९ ॥
तत्कारमित्रंः निसमंमितं
दयंभवेत्तत्वधिमेन्स ञम्‌ ।

ae FIRESSIE FI Lek.
एकत्ररादुस्तमतासुपैति ॥ ११०॥
५-------- Pee ||| || : त्राणिख ala
नतन्तप्पयष्वतः ताः खगस्य तत्कारमित्राणिखमामवंति।

सहस्थखेटस्यः ९ सुतोक्ताकैश्चचनांदितुमिततोर 7॥ १११॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 113] =====
TEMPORARY FalENDSHIP OF PLANETS. 95

Stanzis 109, 110 and 111.

Planets which are in the and, 3rd, th, roth, rrth and rath houses
from where a planet ts at the time of birth are tts temporary friends.
Otherwise they are tts temporary enemies. If the temporary friend
also happens to be a permanent friend, they both beconte intimate
Sriends. If a temporary encmy also happens to be a permanent one
they both become inveterate enemies. If one happens to be a fricnd
awl the other happens to be anenenry they become Samasor neutral,

NOTES.

There is variance between this classification and that given by
Varahamihira in his brihatjataka about temporary friends.
Varahamihira includes the lord of the house where a planet
happens to be exalted in the list of temporary friends. Various
other books also give slight differences on these points.

One thing seems to be certain and if the readers bear that in
mind they will easily get on with their predictive work. There
are apparently three parties among the planets; two of which are
active and the third indifferent or passive. The Sun, Moon, Mars
and Jupiter form one party and are usually friends. Their aspects
and conjunctions with each other are good and will help in the pro-
duction of favourable results. Venus, Saturn and Mercury form
one set of friends who are generally on bad terms with the pla-
nets of the other party. Rahu and Kethu form one party

They have no special interest in either party and give the good
or bad effects of the planets in a more intensified form. It will
be noticed in the above formula that the planets from any given
planet at the time of birth in the 2nd, and 2th, in the 8rd and
the 11th, in the 4th and the !0th are friends. Here there is ob-
served some order. The planets in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th from any
planet, as also those which are in the 12th, 11th and 10th or pla-
nets regularly in the first 3 houses from the position of the given
planet forwards and backwards, are his friends. Those which oc-
eupy 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th, are enemies. If a temporary
friend becomes a permanent enemy the result is neutral. If there

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 114] =====
96 SanwARTHACHINTHAMANI.

is friendship both permanently and temporarily there is great:
friendship. If there is enmity temporarily and permanently there
will be inveterate enmity. There are many slight shades in
friendship and enmity which-have to be borne in mind in che fore-
telling of the future events and then the skill of the astrologer
depends upon the nice discrimination of facts and balanciag of
the evidence before him. Good natural intelligence and large fami-
liarity with the's¢ientific rules will make a man always a great adept
in the science of astrology. Dull people kaye never shoneas adepts
in any branch ofknowedge and much less could they shine well in
a department of science, whose pretensions, real or imaginary, are
of the grandest flight. Rahu and Kethu will share the same fate
in these matters as do the other planets. These relationships
among the different planetary bodies are very important in deter-
mining their actual power with reference to their effects on the
prospects of the native's life,
PE

॥ ग्रहाणांषड्बखनिर्णयः ॥
स्वोचेसहद्रेखनवांडाकेपि
सवर्षरगाणेदिरसांदाकेपि ।
तविंशाशकेचाथकठांराकेच
यास्यंतितेस्थानबलंग्रहंद्राः॥ ११२॥

Stanza 112.

f shall now give the Shadbalas of planets. Plats te exalta.
tion, tn friendly houses, tn thedr own Navanesas, tn their own HOUSES,
zu thecr Drakkanas, 21% their Dwadasamsas, in their Shodasamsas
ant in they Thvimsamsas, are said to possess Stanabala.

NOTES.
Stanabala means the strength which planets derive from their
being in particular places which are favourable to them. I have
elaborately explained what is meant by Drakkana, Navamsa, Dwa-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 115] =====
Directioxan Srresara oy Piavers. 97
dasamsa, Thrimsamsa and Shodasamsa. When planets occupy
their own divisions and subdivisions they acquire great strength
and their rays are capable of exercising the most favourable influ-
ences on the horoscope of any person.

waganafenarga
वीयौयमेतदडामेकंभौमो ।
अस्तेकंसूनुरबैखवानजलेरो
वेधोनिशानाधभकवीकुवेरे ॥ ११३॥
AAAS QTE
स्तदन्तरेचेत्वः यातएव ।
खमासहोरादिनवत्सरेषु

न ~

वीर्यान्विताभावुचुलटदाः ॥ ११४॥
Stanzas 113 & 114.

Lagua represents East and Guru ant Buda ave strong there.
Ravi aut Kuja become strong in the roth house which indicates the
South. Sant ts powerful in the 7th house which shows the West and
Sukra and Moon are strong in the gth which represents the North.
fn the seventh from the house where they are strong, they become
weak tn Derbala, Lhe intermediate strength must be found out by
the semple rule of three. Their own month, their own hora, their
own weekday and thir own year for the planets give their Katlabala.

NOTES.

First the anthor details the Digbala or directional strength.
All planets are not strong in one and the same direction. Jupi-
ter and Mercury, when they occupy the Hastern direction, repre-
sented by the Lagna, become powerful. In the 7th house from
the Lagna where they have this Digbula they lose that power
altogether. Suppose they occupy the 4th house. This is midway
between the Ist and 7th and therefore they only will have half
of the Diybala they had in Lagna. They continue to lose this

12

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 116] =====
98 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

strength until they: reach thei?th. house where they have no
strength af all.. From the 7th house up to the Lagna they gain
propogtiquately the strength, they have lost. Suppose they are.in
the 9th. It is the 8rd house from, thé. 7th, and therefore by a
simple rule of three, they rougbly get about 3/7ths of the digbala
or little less than half. पीते दकमनु (प To be more
accurate, the exact degraé of the. birth must be calculated and
then for each sign or Bhd Wh! 36 Histees’ have th be portioned ont.
Suppose a person is boptdeybhe 95th, degree of ;Mesha. If Guru
is also in the same degree he has Digbala completely. But when
he is found in the’ 30th ‘degre {ति the birth degree, what is
the strength he has? Frgm the 26th Hegre ot Mesha we have to
take 180° to see Guru completély without Digbala. In the 25th
degree of Thula Guru loses RINKS PHESn’ “Buk the is found in the
20th degree of V vishabhe. ee ee 25/180 degrees of strength
or 5/36th of his directional strength: fle las tierefore a balance
of 31/36th of his strength and the effects.i0 be foretold have to be
modified as per degrees of his strength. I

Similarly consu't for other planets.

The authar now gives Nalalula or strength arising from
the influence of ime. Planets in their own hora. in their
months, in their weekdays and in their years-have A’alubala. What
are these is a question which has to be properly explained. ‘The
hove that he refers to here seems to be different from the hora as
a division of the Zodiac. The world began with the appearance
cf the Sun. He therefore commanded the first 23 ghatikas after
the first sunrise and therefore the first Sun’s day become the first
Sunday. The second horw (an English hour is exactly equivalent
to an Indian Hora and the whole astrological science is called the
Hora Shastra from the compounding of two words Aho day and
Ratri night and by the dropping of ‘A the first letter, and tri the
last letter we get the word hora, denoting time) on the first Sunday
was governed by Sukra, the third was ruled by Buda, then Chan-’
dra, then Manda, then Jeeva, and then Dharasuta. ~ Seven
hours thus passed away and the 8th hour again was governed’

*

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 117] =====
NALABALA, oo

by theSun, the 9th by Venus, the 10th by Mercury, 11th by Moon,

2th by Saturn, 18th by Jupiter and the l4th by Mars. © Again’
the 15th hour was governed by Ravi, 16th by Sukra, 17th by Buda,
18th by Chandra, 19th by Sail, 20th by Gur and the Ilst by
Kuja. The 22nd was again governed vy Ravi, the 23rd by Sukra
and the 24th hora by Buda- Thus the first day of 24 hours passed off
beginning with the Sun’s Hora and ending with the Hora of Mercury.
On the morning of the 2nd dgy at synrise, or the 25th hour after
creation and appearance of the light the first hora was governed
by the Moon, the 2nd was by. Sani, the 8rd by Guru, the 4th by
Kuja and so on. The second was therefore called the Moon’s day
or Monday or Soma Wara from the fact of the Moon governing the
first hora after sunrise. On the 3rd day at sunrise the first hora
fell under the influence of Kuja and hence it was, called Kuja or
Mangala Wara. On the 4th day the first horu after sunrise was
governed by Buda and itis called Buda Wara. On the Sth day the
first hora was governed by jupiter, and hence the day was called
Guru Wara. On the 6th the first hora was governed by Sukra and
hence it was named Sukra Wara. On the 7th day the first hora
was governed by Sani and it was called Sani Wara. On the 8th
day the first hora after sunrise was governed by the Sun and again
it was called Sunday and so it is now going on. Planets therefore
occupying their own horas have this Awlabala. In ealculations
based on Lunar movements-called the Chandra Mena—the year
begins after the Amavasya of Phalguna. The Ruler or King for
that year will be the lord of the weekday on whieh the Prathama
or the first lunar day of the new year begins. Thus, this year Shar-
wari (1900 & 1901) began on.a Saturday and Sani is. the King for
the whole of this yeam Fie nay. bevsadd ;to: get Kalabala. Again
the months are under’ the iafluence of planets and whoever rules
the month he gets Kalabala. . ‘Tie weekdays are too well known
to need any explanation. '@he. berm om a Tnesday is under the in-
fluence of Mars and he gets Kalabala. There is another version
of these Kalabalas. - The notes abe already too tong and I leave

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 118] =====
#a0 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

my readers to refer to other books for cansultations on these mat-
ters. The author continues about Kalabala further on.
SS

रात्रोबरास्युश्टानिचन्द्रमोमा
खयोग्रहाश्चाहिरवीज्यशुक्राः।
ATA AAAS OTT
स्सौम्यास्तथान्येलबलाःक्मेण ॥ ११५ ॥

 

 

Sranza 115.
Sant, Chandra aud Kuga are powerful during the night, Ravi
Guru and Sukra are strong during the dey. Buda is powerful
during the day and night. Auspictous planets are powerful during
the waxing half and evil planets are strong during the waning half
of the Lunar month.
NOTES.

The author gives another example where the planets get
Kalabaia. Yn the first half of the lunar month, the Moon waxes
stronger and stronger every day, every hour and every minute
and the bengfics are said to be powerful during this half. In the
second half of the lunar month, the Moon begins to lose gradually
the brillianey of her disk and the Mal-jics are said to be powerful.
Moon, Mars and Saturn are powerful during the night time and they
have Kalabale only for those who areborn during the night. Ravi,
Gurn and Sukra are strong during the day time and only those
who are born during the day eau count upon the Kalubala of these
planets. Buda has Kadubele both. during the day and during the

nigh ts
OSS

शुभेक्षिताःपूणबखान्वितास्तु
दृष्टमरपापखोेरदृ्टाः ।

| दण्टदययोदर्रयीहचातरं
यथावुपातखर द्र"बलाय ॥ ११६ ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 119] =====
भै

Dug axp Ayana Baras. 101

Straxza 116.

Planets which are aspeetsd by Boenefics Lave Poorna Drigbala,
Planets which are aspectedé by evtl planets have Papa Drigbala.
The relative strength of these Drigbalas wezst de found ont by
the simple rule af three.
NOTES.

Dri: means aspect or sight and Drigbala means the stren gih
- or weakness which a planet derives from the aspects of other
planets. Planets have already been classified as Benefies and Malefics
and the aspects of auspicious planets like Guru, Sukra, Shubha
Buda and Poorna Chandra are productive of much strength and
favourable results. The rest are evil planets and when they are
aspecting they produce weakness or debility.

(न्म्य ——
सोम्यायनेत्वातेवली दि विनाध
श्न्द्रस्तद-यसमयेयख. तावान्‌ ।
वक्रान्विताःक्षिष्तेः तदि तयद CAT:

+ 4 ० ^. च (||| |||
येजयीधभवविगंतिकान्तिः क्तः ॥ ११७ ॥
Stanza 117.

The Sux is strong in the Qotarayans, the Moon is strong in the
Dakshinayana. Mars and other planets are strong when they have
Vakra. Sf any of the jive phinets, Kuja, Buda, Guin, Sukra and
Sand ts successul in the planetary fight, and occupies the Northern
half of the celestial globe, he will be strong.

. , MOTRS. ।
Three important.facts have been detailed in this stanza.
There are two Ayanas or halves of the year. Oottarayan com-
mences from the month of Makar#,end-continues through Koombha,
Meena, Mesha, Vrishabha and Mithuna. During these morths the
Sun is powerful and occupies a northerly direction. The Dakshina-
ana extends over Kataka, Simha, Kanya, hula, Vrischika and

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 120] =====
102 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

Dhanus. Here the Sun has a Southerly direction and the Moon
is, said to be ,paygrful dyrigg des Ayoue. Planets have various
rates ४ wgoxempents. They: a first forwards and have a normal
movement ‘ hen by sehad yanilsible’ forces called Seegrocha,
Mandocha and Patha, they are dragged backwards and forwards.
These complicate the movements BP ofinets and make their calcu-
Iptiong by, no meane wary wmebybein ety । ` `
_,. Planets, tyrn beek, ow: gat intd: what! js galled -Vuk?a gati or
retrograde. After'going for domebiine in this direction they again
turn towards their norwal'direstion and are then ‘said to. be int their
Ruju gati, .Then they get.into an aeeeletated mevemerit to make
up the time lost hy their retrogrades and.get into what is called
Athichara gate or acceleration. Retregrade planets are strong.
Acceleration makes them weak. Planets begin to fight when they
are in conjunction with Mars. “This is well explained in Brihat-
jataka Chap. 1L.,.[f the plaibh wins'ip the fight aod occupies the
Northern half'of the globe, it gets peculiar strength. These
sources of strength’$re called Chista: Bald or’ tr@hgth from doing
work. | CL ५५१ NINN ॥
Haul 11
मन्वार्लौम्य । उ सशुक्राश्ांकसयां । +

CUES RAREST

नेसर्मिकाख्यवलिनःखचराकऋमेण ।

ततस्थानविक्षाखदृगुक्तचेष्टा

नेसर्गिकंषडूवरमेवसुक्तम्‌ ॥ ११८ ॥

=

" (शकः

Sraxza 118. |
Sai, Kuja, Buda, Guru, Sukva, Chandra and Ravi, arc respective.
ly stronger than cach other. Thts"ts their Nisargikabala, Shadbalas
are (1) Stana Baia, (2) Digbala, (3) Kalabala, (4) Drigbala,
(5) Chesta Bala and (6) Nésargikabala. = ` AM
SO 77777770 ।

Th the above 8 of 4'statims the author has attempted to show
clearly wilich dre the 6 prizicipal so'itces’ of strength ‘to’ dach of the
planets. | He ‘has alitendy ‘shown the various Vergas which firah

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 121] =====
. , SHADBALAS. - 103

strength or ee t ma pet + iling a large
number of णलि ts’ whiclr'e Mi ४ in astrology
ought to remember पण weryT irre वक वकष of strength

called the shadbalus 1 tkabala denotes th per manent strencth
of the respective ienesaY PUP PRR OH

Sani is the weakest of the lot.) Next comes Kuja, next in order
of strengih is the planet. Buds; wechawe then Guru, then comes
Sukra, then Chandra and the strongest is the plunet Ravi. Vura-
hamihira and Jainini Maharishe speak to the same facts and we
have qoted their sutras in the astrological Magazine Vol. 1V. to
which our readérs can advantageously refer for elaborate explana-
tion. When an astrologer does not know how far the planets pos-
sess strength, his venturing into the fields of prediction would surely
be attended by danger to the science and disgrace to himself.
Where certain ingredients form tetessary factors in the pronounc- -
ing of a judgment they ought to-be carefully considered and weighed
before attempts are made, to-pronqunce the judgment. A rider
who does not know the nature of the animal he rides,-runs ‘the
danger of having a kick or a fall from the horse, and in a similar
way onc who does not know what he is talking about or doing is
sure to get into an unpardonable confusion. This is the first:and the
most important chapter, and the details herein given ought.to be
thoroughly mastered and be familiar to the student before he ven-
tures to consult horoscopes and-make predictions. A Judge
ought to know the -principles. of law before he proceeds to try a
case. The way in which a man brings ta bear the electrical cur-
rents of his head— brain power—-upoen any branch of study has much
to do with the success or failure-of that particular subject. Astro-
logy requires tle best knowledge in its technicalities, as well as the
greatest intelligence and ,the best, personal-experience. Where
these are not’ present or are wanting, in depth, attempts in the as-
trological predictions must be attended with certain failures.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 122] =====
104 SaRwARTHACHINTAMANT.
॥ अधस्यान (पकद्व खानतपरिमष्गाकिहःः ॥
॥॥(॥५॥॥ >| |
SHAT ETE TS 5 1a
सुख्याववन्त SEL EI ।

STRSTR iil) | । _@ || :
न स्य्दभमधतं ALU LS
Staxza 119. ||| ।

The Shadbala, of the Lagnadhipatt? will be the strength of the
Lugna. Where the Lagna ha ens to bea Nara Rasce, it gets the
strength of one Rupa. Where tt happens to be Chatushpada Rasee,
*t gets the strength of half a Rupa and where it chances to be a Kita
Aases, it does not share any strength at all,

NOTES.

Lagna is the technical name given to the sign of the Zodiac
in which a person is bora. This is the groundwork for all astrolo-
gical consultations and predictions. Hitherto the author gave
the sources of the strength of the planets, but he said nothing
about the dirth sign (Lagna) itself. Now he says that Lagna
derives strength of one Rupa when it is in Nara Rasee Human-
signs). If Lagna falls in a Chatushpada (quadruped sign) it
derives only the strength of half a Rupa. This means that
Chatushpada Lagnas are capable of absorbing half the strength
of their lords. If the Lagna chances to be a Kita Rasee (Reptile
sign) it absorbs all the strength of its lord and leaves none in
return, (Vile notes to Stanza 61 page 59) See also Brihtjataka
Chap. I. Stanza 17. Nara Rasees (Humansigns) are Mithuna, Kanya,
Thula, Kumbha and the first half of Dhanas. Chatush pada rasees
(Quadruped signs) are Mesha, Vrishabha, Simha, the 2ad half of
Dhanas, and the first half of. Makara, Kita Rasee (Reptile sign) .
means Vrischika..

"~ ० ~~

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 123] =====
TEXTENT OF SHADRALAS. 105

चेत्कीरःल््किमपीहनास्ति
स्फुटंविख्य्रस्यवलंतदाह्ुः ।

ATA ATS TRA ASAT
च॑द्रस्तुषटूपंचवसुघराजः ॥ १२० ॥
सेदुर्‌ रविवहुरुस्यात्‌
सा्†निच॑चाथसितोबटीस्यात्‌
मेदस्तुपेचैवतुषड़्बखानां
सयोगएवापरघान्यधास्युः ॥ १२१ ॥
रूपत्रयंवखमुडत्यथपावहीनं
स्थानेतुदिग्बरखुमथांधिविदहीनरूपम्‌ ।
ऋत्वंदारीनवरखमततुचेशिताख्य
मष्टांगदीनयुगरेवतुकाखवी्यं ॥। १२२ ॥
प्रणािङेरविरागांकसुतामरेज्याः
सखार्धबरछत्वयनजंहिपुथण्विभागे ।
रसांशहीनंदिशेवीयंमाहः
स्थानेतुपादाधिकयुग्मरूपम््‌ ॥ १२३१
काटेबखत्रयेशविहीनयुग्म
मर्धभवेञचेशटितवीर्यमेव ।
अ्यशोनमेकंत्वयनंवरंस्या

त्सीतांशुदेर्वैद्रसपत्नगुरवोः ॥ १२४ ॥
14

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 124] =====
106 SARWARTHACHINTAMANT.

AAS HAG NAA
साच पटहा ।

दिद्य्रू्पबल्मायन
तर्यदाभवेतस्थानिकष्मंयुग्मम्‌ ॥ १२५ ॥
2742248 120, 121, 192, 123, 124 & 125.

The Sun becomes pewerful in Shadbala by getting 6 Rupas end
30 Virupas. Zhe Moon éy 6 Rupas, Mars by 5, Mercury by 7,
Fupiter by 6 Rupas § 30 Virupas, Venus by 5 Rupas and 30 Viru-
pas and Saturn by 5 Rupas. Any power under the above mentioned
Jigure will not give the planets parna (full) Shadbalas. In Sthan-
abala ‘hese must be 2% or 3 Rupas for the planets. In Dighala
there must be 3/g0f a Rupa. Ju Chasta the planets must have 50
Virupas.

fu Kalabala ove 0) 52 ४17प)38 2110 30 51198 २८
give Purnabala to Ravi, Buda and Guru provided, the above three
planets have got 30 Virupas from their Ayanabala. Chandra and
Sukva must have 60 Virupas for Digbala. 2 Rupas and 15 Viru-
pas for Sthanabala, 7 Rupa and go Virupas for Kalabala and
jo Virupas for Chastabala, 0 Verupas for Ayanabala. Whex
they possess the above satd Rupas and Virupas they become fully strong.
Kujaand Sant must have 40 Virupas for Chastabala, ove Rupa,
7 Virupas 27 30 Paras for Kalabala, 30 Virupas /o7 Dig-
bala, 20 Virupas for Ayanabala, 2 Rupas and 30 Virupas for
Sthanabala. When they possess the above figures they become.
possessed of Purnabala.
NOTES.

The author has introduced Rupas, Virupas, Paras and Suras.
The readers might advantageously refer to the works of Sripa-
thi, Khacharadarpana, Grahalaghava, Siddanta Siromoni, Aryabat
tiam and lastly but not with least advantage to the most wonder,
ful work the Suryasiddhanta for the Shadbala Sadhana of planets
or finding out the 6 sources of strength which have been detailed
above,

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 125] =====
Rupas, Virvpas, Paras axp Souras. 107

60 Suras make one Para
60 Paras ., 5, Virupa
60 Virupas ,, >, Rupa

Thus one Rupa equals 60 x 60 x 6) = 2,16,000 Suras. It
clearly shows that the huge intellects of the Aryan literary giants
grasped the minute divisions of time with a wonderful facility for
which we find no parallel in the divisions of modern time. As I
intend treating the mathematical portion or Siddanta Bhaga of
astrology in the appendix to this work I shall not repeat the cal-
culations here. In all calculations to find out the exact positions
of the planets, a great mathematical familiarity becomes an in-
dispensable necessity. One who does not learn how to fix the
planets in their rasees and the 16 Vergas or minute divisions of
those rasees, could hardly be called an astrologer and his calcula-
tions by rough or rude methods will not enable him to find out
the exact source of strength which the planets derive from the
ocenpation of these divisions. Therefore no predictive anxiety
should be entertained by any student or reader of astrology
before he is thoroughly acquainted with the mathematical portion.
‘This applies to all with 2 few exceptions. There are two methods
of calculation and prediction. One is the well known system of
deduction. The other is the much coveted but very rare method
of induction. ‘The latter is possessed by a few blessed mortals
who can, without resorting to these elaborate mathematical cal-
culations, fix correctly the planetary positions by looking at the
person of the native, but such power is the possession of only a
few men of genius and originality who occasionally grace this world
with their presence. In deduction the mind has to pass through
‘all the gradations of recorded knowledge bequeathed to us by
the ancient astronomers but in induction, the person strikes out a
path for himself through the intensity of his intellectual reach
-which others have only to follow in wonder.

enti ——

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 126] =====
108 Sy RW ARTHACHINTAMANT.
दिनेरापुतस्यवपुन्धरायाः सूनोःकरमादीयंुदाहरंति ।
॥ ' -खपरिमागविवेकः ॥
आरादहवीयत्रमवंतिभाव सम नेपर्यैतमथस्‌ तास्थुः॥१२६॥
खोचेसुहतक्षवगतोम्रहंदरः
पड्ूभिर्वलैसुंख्यवलान्वितोपि।
संषिस्थितस्संधिफलप्रदःस्या
देवैविचित्याथवदेदिपाके।॥ १२७1;

Sranzas 126 & 127

The author now proceeds to give the extent of Phatan result)
whith planets are capable of producing. The planets have Aroha
and Avaroha dasas. Their exaltation and occupation of friendly
houses are matters of great consequence. Planets in Sandha Sthanas
are practically powerless and influence very hittle for good. If there
zs any doubt regarding the birth Lagna of a person tt has to be
determined with reference to the Prana Rasi or Mandi and their
Thrikouas.

NOTES.

These are important stanzas. ‘T'wo facts are prominently
brought to the notice of the readers. (1) The extent of the Pha-
lam or results good cr bad which may be expected from the planets
in their periods and subperiods (2) the determination of the Lagna

‘or birth sign of the Zodiac when it is called into question, or when
there are difficulties about its being correctly fixed. All planets
“have two states which are (1) ascending and (2) descending. The
first is technically called Aroha Dasa, and the second is. called
Avaroha. In music Arohana and Avarohana or rising to higher pit-
ches and falling to lower ones are well known. All other inter-

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 127] =====
^ 10 anp Avarnona Dasas. 109

mediate states are only. fractions of these in strength. J shall
explain more clearly what the author here means. After the
planets are correctly placed in their respective places at the time of
birth by grahasputa calculations, take any one of the planets. In
the notes to previous slokas I have shown which are the degrees of
deep exaltations for the planets and their corresponding debilita-
tions. It has also been shown, which degrees constitute Moolathri-
konas, Swakshatras and Swochas. Take a planet in the deepest
exaltation. Ravi is in his Paramocha (highest exaltation) in the
10 th degree of Mesha. It is shown that in the 180th degree from
there or in the 10th degree of Thula, he becomes Parama Neecha
(greatest‘humiliation). Again from Parama Neecha to Paramocha he
is separated by 180 degrees. When Ravi gets the highest power
in the 10th degree of Mesla he reaches, as it were, the summit
of his power and glory and cannot go auy higher 3 and thencefor-
wards he begins to lose his power gradually until he becomes the
most powerless in the 10th degree of Thula. This movement of
Ravi from Mesha to Thula is called Avaroha or descending order of
motion. Every day he loses a degree of his power and when he
reaches 180 degrees or the 10th degree in Thula he becomes per-
fectly powerless. But when he begins to move from the 10th deg-
ree of Thula towards his house of exaltation in Mesha his move-
ment is characterised as Aroha or ascending motion. He begins
to gain power every day until he reaches the zenith of his strengtir
in the 10th degree of Mesha. Take the Moon forexample. On the
New Moon day he is practically lustreless and for 15 days after-
wards he gains every day one Kala or one degree strepgth until on
the Full Moon day, he cammands all the glory which is credited
to Poorna Chandra. Here he is said to possess Shodasa Aalus or 16
parts of light. Then again a reverse phenomenon happens. The
Moon begins to lose one. Kala every day, grows less and less bright
until at last he does not appear at all in the horizon on account
of the want of light from the solar disk. All other planets have
similar phases of gaining and losing their splendour and we can

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 128] =====
310 SARWARTMACIEINTA MAND

even see them with our naked syes provided we have a strong
vision and stronger patience to watch the heavens from day to da ye
Jupiter has exaltation in Cancer and appears there as a planet of
the brightest yellow color and thence he begins to lose brightness
gradually until he becomes weakest in Capricorn where he seems a
dull, yellowish planet. Then again he moveson gathering glory
until he reaches his Zenith in Cancer. Mars is quite the reverse
of Jupiter.

In Cancer he is most powerless and his globe appears pale
dull red. He gains glory from Cancer to Capricorn and in the lat-
ter sign he appears to the naked eye as a bright red planet and in
his fullsplendour. Mercury is not visivle to ordinary vision on ac-
count of his nearness to the solar body, and when seen through a
telescope be appears brightest green in Virgo and with dull pale
greenish color in Pisces. Venus appears quite the reverse of
Mereury. He is weakest in Virgo and strongest in Pisces and ap-
pears asa pale silvery planet where be resembles almost a little
Moon. Saturn although darkblue, appears brightest in Thula and
most powerless in Mesha. All these facts are demonstrable to our
naked eyes and we need not have recourse to costly or complicated
instruments. When a planet begins to move from his place of
deepest exaltation, he takes a downward movement and loses
brillianey day after day. This is called his Avaroha Dasa, and the
greater the distance from his place of exaltation, the greater is his
weaknegs in point of brilliancy and production of favourable results.
When planets are in Sandhies or junctions of time where they may
be said to be neither here nor there, their powers seem to be perfect-
ly neutralised and they give no favourable results. Taking the Sun
in 30 degrees after the 10th from Mesha, we shall see what power he
gets. Ho isin his Avaroha or descending Dasa. If his power is re-
presented by 180 degrees in the 10th division of Mesha it is repre-
sented as Zero in the 10th degree of Thula. Therefore by the appli-
cation of simple rule of three, we can find out what degree of strength
the Sun has after he. moves 80 degrees from Mesha. He has
moved 30 degrees towards his declining course and therefore in

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 129] =====
Aes ५.1 Woes ५.
at ॥ a

tA em ~ _ ५ ५
१ 5

So.ution of Dovsts 1x Laaya. dil .

the 30th degree after Mesha, his power has to be estimated at only

ays

The figures are so simple that I need not waste the time of my
readers by working out this question. In the ease of other planets
the figures are not so simple and the calculations have to be care~
fully made. Aroha Dasa always produces greater good than Ava-
rolia.

Now we come to another most important point, that of fixing
the Lagna of the person when there are doubts about it.

The author throws some valuable hints which many be of
great practical value, After getting the time ot birth as correctly
as possible, the astrologers are recommended to make Lagna
sphutom. By this means they will be able to correctly find out in
what sign of the Zodiac the time of birth falls in. Where persons are
generally born in the middle of Lagnas and the time of birth is
fairly recorded there are no difficulties in fixing the Lagna although
there may be doubts and difficulties in fixing the minute amsas
recommended by the author. But where the time happens to be
between the last amsa of any sign and the first of the next rasee
doubts arise as regards the foretelling of the person’s characteristics
and here there is absolutely no help unless the astrologer is a great
adept and has long personal experience by which he can fix the
amsas and Lagnas with reference to the complexion, stature and
characteristics of the person. This would be begging the question
lagna and Graha sphutas should enable the students to fix the
Lagnas and where these create doubts his progress is materially obs-
tructed. If he is a mar of, lorgé attaingients aad experience he
does not much care for these details as he goes altogether on
induction 11111

Lagna has to be definitely fixed, both with reference to birth
and also with reference to queries, Find out Chandra and Mandi
at the time of query about the doubtful Lagna, and fix it as that of
the fifth or ninth from the position of Mandi or that of Prana

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 130] =====
112 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL

Rasee or Moon. The query reveals say Mandi in Kataka and
Chandra in Meshae As per explanation given by the author the

birth Lagna of the person must | Moon. |

be either the 5th or 9th from - ॐ
Mandi t.e., Scorpio or Pisces or : Question (Mandi.
the 5th from Chandra namely [-—~ Lagna

 

Leo or Sagittarius. If the doubt Kundali. |

was between Thula and Vrischi- ; |
ka or between Kumbha and Meena | | |

by the above rule we may fix it in Vrischika or Meena. But sup-
pose the doubt is between Vrischika and Dhanas and Meena and
Mesha. In these cases no amount of advice could help a man—
who has not high intelligence and vast personal experience—in
fixing these doubtful Lagnas and the student must shift for him-
self as best as he could. Inthe nest Sloka the author tries to
give further hints as regards the fixing of these Lagnas which are
very valuable.

 

"~ "था tee,

अथसन्धिव्रनि

॥ न्धखद्रनिणंगः ॥
प्राणत्रिकोणेपरवदंतिटय्ं
ATTA TATA ial Ty I
मादयंराकात्कोगगतंवि नय्र
तदंहाकामस्थितरारिकोणे ॥ १२८ ॥ `
राज्ञाकसत > कभकोणराडो
AESEAGETTHOTAAT |
प्रभेषितन न्मसंमानका =
खग्रसनिश्वायकमत्रतदून्ञाः ॥ १२९ ॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 131] =====
How to Fix A LAana In Dovrt. 113

Sranzis 128 and 129.
fu doubtful cases of Laguna, fix the 5th, or oth house from the
Navansa which ts occupied by Mande, or the 5th or the oth house
Srom the 7th to the amsa occupied by Mandi, or the sth or oth fron
the house occupied by Chandra or tie 9th or 5th houses from the 7th
house to the amsa occupied by Chandra. This may be done either
Jor the time of birth or for the time o Prasna (query).
NOTES
These slokas are difficult to translate from their brevity and
multifarious interpretatious which may be offered to them. Take

 

 

 

a kundali, suppose there is any

doubt about Vrishabha or Mesha | 117 पापि Sani
being the Lagna. The Lagna |

must bethe 5th or 9th from Chan- on

dra or Mandi; now the 5thand 9th | guy (70

 

from Mandi are Virgo and Capri- Kundali
corn and d5thand 9th from Chan- | Born in 1856
dra are Simha and Dhanas. All |

of these therefore cannot be Lug- | | Kuja
nas. Going to the Navamsa, the )Kethu |

5th and 9th from Mandi again ~~~

 

॥॥

happen to be the same as in

 

 

 

Rasee and they are not Lagnas- Lagna Rahu |
Take the 7th from Mandi, it is Guru |/Mandi
Vrischika. The 5th from this 7
Meena, or 9th from this Kataka
cannot be Lagnas. From Mandi | Amsa

Kundali

therefore we have failed to get
any satisfactory solution either in
the Rasee or Navamsa diagrams.
Taking Chandra in the Navamsa,
we see him occupying Kanya, 5th
from him is Capricornus and it
is not Lagna but the 9th from him is Vrishabha which is
the Lagna of the person. These therefore have to be carefully

15

   

। I Heese STP IIIT
Sani {| Chan-
Buda Kethui g ein ag

| Kuja |

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 132] =====
114 SAaRWARTHACHINTAMANI-

tested only in cases where there is any doubt ag regards the
correct Lagna. But where there is not the slightest doubt about
the Lagna there is no sense in applying these tests: Medicines are
recommended only when a person is suffering from some com-
plaints. When there is no disorder, the application of medicine
means thecreation of complications. In the same manner if these
rules are applied to Lagnas which are not doubted they may create
so many doubts and difficulties instead of being helps to the find-
tug of the correct Lagnas. Another and the better test is the
analyses of a person’s characteristics and surroundings in the light
of formulas laid down by astrologers which are warranted by the
combination of planets which obtain at the alleged time of birth.
Ti the results agree with the experiences of the native we may pro-
ceed at once to fix that as the Lagna, which gives us the largest
number of correct predictions. “These tests may be applied both for
time of birth as well as to the time of query (Prasna). These are
very important points which have to be carefully borne in mind and
their utility cannot be too much valued in the determination of doubt-
ful Lagnas. Sphutas give correct Lagnas or their divisions when the
time is granted very correctly, but they do not help us in finding
out which is the correct Lagua of birth. In the majority of cases
the correct time is not forthcoming. The medical man fails to
correctly diagnose the disease although the patient is before
time and he can be questioned on his health. Much more difficult
will it be for an asircloger to judge of an event which took
place in a private compartment years ago and about which there is
no further evidence to clear any doubts. Mandi occupies Vrisha-
Liamsa and the 5th and 9th from it therefore are again Kanya
and Makara, or take the 7th from Mandiin Navamsa. That will
be Scorpio, and the 5th and 9th from that seventh will be Pisces
and Cancer. None of these therefore are the Lagnas. If we
take Chandra in the Amsa he is placed in Kanya. The fifth
and ninth houses from him are Capricorn and Taurus, and the Lag-
na therefore has to be placed in Taurus and notin Aries. We
may also take the 7th from Chandra in the Amsa, and it is

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 133] =====
Srrexatm or Lacxa on (कादा. 115

Meena. The 5th and 9th from Meena are Kataka and Vris-
chika. They are not Lagnas. We have to take into consideration
only such Lagnas as are} likely to come up at the time about
which there is doubt and in which a person is alleged to have
been born. Here the Lagna may be searched either from Mandi
or from Chandra, 5th and 9th houses from them or the 5th and 9th
houses from the 7th house where they are placed in the Navamsa.
There are many astrologers who start at once to make predictions
from simply looking at the Rasee Kundali. How futile such
attempts at success will be can be seen from the importance
attached in astrological works to the divisions of the honses and
the occupataions of plantes in them. ‘he astrologer cannot be too
careful in determining the correct Lagna in whose light the whole
history of the native might be safely predicted. Here therefore, these
hints are of the greatest value. Two and two will make four and this
is correct mathematics. But we have to determine first whether it
is two and two or whether itis two and éhree. If it is two and two
there is no doubt of their making four by whomsoever it is worked
but if it is found to be two and three where is the justification for
totalling them up into fous and predicting on the wrong results thus
obtained ? These aim at the very foundation of the horoscope and
therefore ought to be carefully analysed and remembered.

a -- |

तयो्बटेनापिविकस्पमाहुःखग्राजयोरित्थसुदाहरान्ति ।
ल्ग्रेवखेमाद्विवरादिख्यं चद्रेवखेचन्द्रवशादिटप्ं ॥
ATA STAT ASA SIEM STATA १३०॥

Stanza 130.

Uf the prasna Logna zs stroug, then the berth Legna has to be
determined with reference to the position of Mandi. If the Moon

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 134] =====
116 SARWARTHACHINTAMANE.

zs strouz at the question time then the birth Lagna has to be deter-
mined with reference to the position of the Moon. Jf the Prasna
Navamsa 2005 2 ofa (odd) sigus then the birth of a male neust be
predicted ; if the’Pransa Navamsa falls in yoogma (even) signs
the birth of a female must be preutcted.

NOTES,

The learned Venkatasa Daivagnya has takea special care to
bring to the notice of his readers the importance which has to be
attached to the Prasna Lagoa. The birth of a person takes place
under a combination of previous forces some of which are known
to us (Drusta-seer) and many of which are not seen by us, (Ad-
gustaeungeen). He seems to plead, that if a birth is really the resul-
tant of previous forces, working in their own way, may we not con-
sistently say that a Prasna or that which comes out of a person’s
mind freely and produced by previous forces also—(query) must
exualty be the resultant of those same forces working in the Ad-
gusta. plane? Man is born without knowing how he is born, and
he appears on the plane of this world as the resultant of various
forces working in a mysterious way, and thoughts arise in his
mind at different stages of his existence for which he has to search
for causes in the same ddrusta plane. The promptings of his
mind therefore are rightly attributed to the higher powers, com-
ing through the planetary spheres from his previous karma and
working in their own systematic and unknown ways. Many Nusta-
jatakas prepared by me on these principles have been wonder-
fully verified and I myself was often struck with the correctness
of my predictions based entirely on calculations made in the light
of these astrological principles enuneiated so particularly and
elaborately by the eminent astrologers of ancient India. Any
body who wishes to learn these principles of astrology ean come
over to me and spend a few days with me to learn them or commu-
nicate with me on the subject. I shaJl always be willmg to help
persons in this direction. Where the time of question is calculated.
and the planets are correctly fixed find out whether Mandi is strong-
eror Chandra, If Mandi is the stronger of the two, then the Lagna

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 135] =====
Pacnaka, Bopmaka, Karaka anp Vepiaka. 117

has to be found with reference tohim. If Chandra is the stronger
of the two then the above test recommended by the author has to
be applied from the position of Chandra himself. If the Navamsa
of the question time falls inan odd sigu then the birth of a male must
be predicted. Ifthe Navamsa of questicn time falls in an even
sign the birth of a female must be conjecturéd. These are colla-
teral tests which would also help the student in fixing the correct
time of birth. Foran explanation of odd and even signs sce notes
to stauza 16 on P. 24,

Se

॥ अथपाचकबोधककारक्वेधकसंज्ञानाह॥

क्रमाहूहाःपाचकबोधकश्च सकारकोवेधकसंज्ञकस्तु।
मन्दारजीवामरदादुपूज्या दशुक्रारसूर्यात्म ज वासरेडाः॥ १३१
रवीदुसूयौत्मजचंदरपुत्रादडादांकजीवास्फुजितवेनेयाः।
सूयौत्मजारदुदिनाधिनायास्सौम्याकेदवेन्या्ईदनिदापुत्राः॥ १३२
शुक्रैद्देवेज्यधरासुतास्तु
भवन्तितत्पाकसुखामरहंदराः।
स्थानानिवक्षयेक्रमरोग्रहाणां
षटूसक्तधममायगताः कमेण ॥ १३३॥
भानेररादांकात्मजभाग्यकाभ
युक्तास्तुतीर्येथधरासुतस्य। `
घनारिखाभात्यगताजसनों
ितीयवध्त्मिजसोद्राश्च ॥ १३९॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 136] =====
118 SARWARTHACIINTAMANT.

एष्टा सरणा
च
QQ Hear Aaya: |
तृतीयलाभारिकरत्रमारः
त॒
दिनेदासूनोःगध्न्नित १; ॥ १३५॥
Sranzas 181, 132, 133, 134 & 135.

I shall now speak of Pachaka, Bodhaka, Karaka ant Vedhaka
Soungnyas (techiuicaleties).

The following planets are Pachaka, Bodhaka, Karaka, and Vedha-
ha respectively to the plancts nanied below.

To the Sum—Saturn, Mars, Fupiter and Venus—
To the Moon—Venus, Mars, Saturn and the Sun—
To Mars—the Sun, Moon, Saturn aud Mercury—
To Mercury—Moon, Fupiter, Venus ant Mars—

To Fupiter—Saturn, Mars, Moon and the Sun—
To Venus—Mereury, the Sun, Fupiter and Saturi—
To Saturn—Venus, the Moon, Fupiter and Mars—

T shall now give the positions of planets from the particular pla-
net, to whom they become Pachaka, Bothaka, Karaka and Vedhaka.
If Sani occupies 6th from Ravi he becomes Pachaka. Kuga tu the
7th frou Rave becomes Bodhaka. Guru inthe oth becomes Karaka.
Subra in the 11th becomes Vediaka,

Venus in the 5th, Mars in the oth, Saturn iz the r1th, and the
Sun ti the grt from the Moon—

Tie Sun in the and, Moon in the 6th, Saturn in the 11th and
Mercury in the 12th from Mars—

Chandra in the and, Guru in the ath, Sukva tn the 5th ena Kiga
tu the 5th from Buda— |

Sani in the 6th, Kuja in the 8th, Chandra in the 7th aut Ravi in
fie 12th from Guru—

Buda in the 2nd, Ravi in the 6th, Guru tn the rath and Sant in
the gth from Sukra— WIM

Sukre in the 3rd, Chandra tn the 11th, Guru in the 6th, and
Kuja in the 7th from Sani—respectively become, Pachaka, Bodhaka,
Karaka and Vetthaka planets. |

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 137] =====
RESULTS OF PACHAKA Phanets. 119

NOTES.

The above according to the author are some of the technica.
lities by which he is trying to show other sources of strength and
weakness which planets will have by virtue of their relative posi-
tions at the time of birth or question. In the following stanzas,
the results of such positions are clearly explained. In some cases
enmity works good; in some cases friendship results in good.
All these are clearly pointed out. Venus in the 5th from the
Moon, the Sun in the 2nd from Mars, the Moon in the 2nd from
Mercury, Saturn in the 6th from Jupiter, Mercury in the 2ud from
Venus, and Venus in the 3rd from Saturn, become their Pacha-
“agrahas. Mars in the 9th from the Moon, Moon in the 6th
from Mars, Jupiter in the 4th from Mercury, Mars in the 8th
from Jupiter the Sun in the 6th from Venus, and the Moon in
the 11th from Saturn become respectively their Bodbaka planets.
Similarly consult for the rest of the planets.

“नष्ट -
acs

शतुादनशस्यतुपाचकःस्यात्‌

मित्राणिशेचादशशिनस्तुेरी ।

तथेवभौमस्यतुवेधकश्च

शतरबुधस्यात्मकरोगुरोस्तु ॥१३६ ॥
पाकग्रहोवेधकसंज्ञितश्च शत्तुभवेदास्फुनितश्चवेरी।
सकारकोवेधकसेज्ञतश्चशनेस्तुतत्कारकखेचरोरिः॥१२७॥

Sranzas 186 & 187.
The Pachaka planet becomes enemy to Ravi and Chandra. The

vest become friends. The Vedhaka planet becomes enemy to Kuza
and the rest ave friends, The Bodhaka planet becomes enemy to
Butha, the vest ave friends. The pachaka and the Vedhaka planets
become encuztes to Guru, the other two are friends. The Karaka
and Vedhaka planets become enemies to Sukva and the rest are
friends. The Karaka becomes enemy to Sani and the other three
are his friends.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 138] =====
120 Sanw ARTHACHINTAMANT.

NOTES.

When Sani occupies the 6th from Ravi he becomes Pachaka,
and as such he will be considered as an enemy of Raviin addition
to his being a Nisargika Shatru (permanent foe). Sukra in the
ath from Chandra becomes Pachaka and he will be classed as «
foe. Buda in the 12th from Kuja is his Vedhaka and he becomes
auenemy. Guru in the 4th from Buda becomes his Bodhaka and
he becomes a foe. Kujain the 6th and Ravi in the 12th from

uru become his Pachaka and Vedhaka planets respectively and
they become his foes, Guru in the 12th and Sani in the 4th from
Sukra become his Karaka and Vedhaka planets and are declared
his enemies. Guru in the 6th from Sani becomes his Karaka and
thus will be classed as an enemy. These denote the various
sourees of strength on considerations of which predictions of
good and bad have to be based

ane
॥ पाचकयोगफरम्‌ ॥
मृ्टान्नपानांवरमूषणापिं
राज्यार्धभूखाभमतीवसौख्यम्‌।
पर्थमहोत्साहमतीवशक्ति
कुर्यादूम्रहाःपाचकरसंज्ञकोयं ॥१३८॥
मित्रेयथान्यायफरंतदन्ये ग्रहेतदन्यत्फर्मातनोति ।
॥ बोधकसंज्ञायोगफलखमाह ॥ `

समभराज्यं बहुराजपरूजां विद्याविनोदांकिंतगयपद्यम्‌ ।॥१३९॥

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 139] =====
Erructs os PacHaka AND’ Bopaaka PLANets. 121

Stanzas 138 & 189

The planet which beconses Pathaka, confers upon the native excet-
lent food, gook cows milk, valuable clothes and ornaments, power,
wealth aud lands, mith happiness, courage, hopefuluess, great energy,
and success. If the Pachaka planet becomes a friend the above
veselis ave to be expected... Lf havbecomes an enewty, losses and trou-
bles front these sources will mark the track of the Pachaka planct
If the planet becohias Bodhaka he will give great gain and power,
much respect among the ruling classes, hagh education, uzt and
humour, reputation, veligiousness and general happiness.

NOTES

. The author has already explained in the previous stanzas,
which planets become: Fachakas, which are Bodhakas, which are
Karakas and which are Vedhakas. He has also shown that Pa-
chakas become friends and foes as well as other planets, some
give good as friends and some give good as enemies. Al] these
have been carefully “detailed. After marking the planets at the
time of birth, find out their relative positions with referencé fo
each other and see who become Pachakas, who are Bodhakas, who
are Karakas and who are Vedhakas. Having found out. these
technicalities,‘ as the-author calls them, then predict the results.
such as have been explained here by him. The full signification
of a Pachaka can never be expected unless the planet who becomes
Pachaka is otherwise fully free from the several influences to
which he is subjected in the ordinary course of planetary move-.
ments. This point of giving each planet its due influence, and
not more, ‘has often been touched upon. in. these notes, and has
to be specially remembered by. the readers of this work in their
ventures to make predictions.
See

यरास्तप॒ःप्रसिमतीवभाग्यं
कु्यादूहोबोधकलंन्ञेतोयम्‌ |
गरदेचतस्मिनरसफंवदति .
मितेषिपर्थासफलंतदन्ये ।(१४०॥

16

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 140] =====
122 SaABWARTHACHINTAMANI-

॥ अथ कारकसंज्ञाकं =भाह ॥
NO. eftorpenpfasy

WAH ira | |
IRAE, I
TON Le
duiasins Ta

i SON ON.
रक।९क(मतसम। सा९-२ए॥ १४१॥

3179248 140 & 141.

८ 5044 00०८ 25 दद ‰८ 6०2४८८5 0८ ०९००८ good results,
If otherwise the results will be the reverse of what has been foretold
of him. The Karaka planet produces wealth and poverty alternately.
ft gives disease and trouble to wife, children, and velations and un-
happiness urmonetary affairs. If the Karaka planet becomes a friend,
he produces trouble through thieves, frre, and low classes of people. If
he becomes an enemy he gives the reverse results or happiness and

SUCCESS.
NOTES.

I pointed out already that when planets possess these techni-
cal positions, they give good and bad. Friendship in some cases
produces good, while enmity in others produces good. Negatives
produce positive and positives produce negative. If Sani wants
to do evil and he is strongly opposed by the rays of the Sun, who
also wants to do evil what would be the result ? The rays of the
two planets oppose each other, and are neutralised. The result,
happily for the native, will be the averting of evil from both
planets, for both evil influences are opposed to each other and
are negatived, and as a matter of fact, when evil does not happen,
good must come out.

i
सकारकोवैरिसमोनतन्त
qe Eee, Sasa |

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 141] =====
GENERALISED ErrEgcrs. 128
Nh THAT MRSA UI
चोराभ्रिराचुक्षितिपाखसंषे
रतीवदुःखंस्वपदच्युतिंच ॥ १४२ ॥
यानव नना
वदेदूहेतत्फर्मन्यथासात्‌।

Stanza 142.

I now speak about the Vedhaka planet. Vedhaka planet produces,
danger from thieves, fire, enemies and rulers, travelling in foreign
countries, and loss of wealth rand happiness when it is friendly
When itis unfriendly the reverse results are to be predicted te. the
man will have success, much respect and happiness.

‘NOTES.

This illustrates the principle. explained in the above stanza.
The first half of this stanza refers tothe reverse results of Karaka
planets whose significations have heen explained in the notes to
the above stanzas.

पा)
॥ अथ समछ्याशुभाशुभफरनिणंयः ॥
पकेदात्सुषिरात्यदाचुभवनेयुक्तोपहारेभ्वर
ASE AMES TS TA

भाग्येवादः८२५९-्८।२८८ ४८२ धप नाद्य.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 142] =====
124 SABRWARTHACHINTAMANE.

Stanza 14s.

I shall now explain the genePal vesilis, The planets who are tn the
lath, Oth and 8th houses from the Dasanatha are his enemies
Planets inthe z1th, in the. ouse.of exaliationu. of tive Dasanutha, in
the sth, sth, oth and roth from’ the:Ddsanatha are favourable
Favourable planets give good and unfavourable planets give bad ds
ing sich Dasas and Bhakties |

NOTES

This is a general stanza to enable the reader to find out
what results the lords of Bhnkties wall produce.on the native’s
life during such periods. ‘Dasanatha means lord of the general pe-
riod. Bhuktinatha means the lord of the sub-period. In the caleula-
tions of astrology, lords of 6th, 8th and 12th and planets occupy-
ing those unfavourable houses are always bad and evil results will
be produced. These housesare technically called Dusta Stands or
Doosthanas. But when planets are found in 3rd, 4th, 5th, 9th, 10th
and 11th houses from each other or from the Lagna they produce
good. The author here refers ~~ = |
only to the positions of planets: ~ Buda | Chan-
with reference to each other at the |——— Hi ॥॥
time of-birth and Dasa and not | | ate
with reforence to the Lagiha: Take © - 11111
an ilnstration.. The planets are *- 48 years ola |=
peculiarly situated. In the Dasa 1111111
of Sani, Ravi and Chandra pro-
duce evil, because the Dasanatha
Sani stands-m-the 12th -honse
from them. `

They stand to him in the 2nd which alsoisbad. Take-the Dasa
of Ravi or Chandra dnd the Bhukti of Guru. Guru stands to them
in the 6th hpuge-and he is-bad and they, stand to Guru in.the 8th
which also is bad. This is called Shasta and Astama or 6th and
8th houses ~fropr-each ther. .Tf.on the other hand we take Sukra
and Raho’s Bhukties in Sani or Buda Dasas, they stand to each
ophér ‘ih, “Hie Bnd and J1th houses respectively and they become

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 143] =====
Musis Propounp sstaotocican THronies. 125

friends and produce good. These aresome of the sources of strength

and weakness which have also to be taken into consideraticn in

determining favourable and upfavourable results produced by the

planetary combinations and _ positions at, the time of birth
aS

 पाकक्रियादिसहितदयुचरस्तुशचुः `
` ‹ स्पातस्यानतोतिशुभदस्त्वतिङतेभनाख्यः।
 . स्थानावुरूपफलंमत्रविवित्यमार्भ |
` ज्ञात्वावर्देति लदाटचत्त सिद्धये ॥ १४४॥

8१7५४४५ 144

| Whew the: above. described Pachaka planets become enemies and
actupy favourable places just described in stanza 143, they become
extremely powerful asl produce much good. These minute detaits
neust: be-well known and the Great Munis propounded all these astro-
logical principles for the edification of the world.

NOTES
It: has -been all: along. described that when 9 planet gains

power from various sources, it becomes stronger to produce good
or evil than. the planet which is powerful in some cases and
powerless in others. This is perfectly natural.. When a planet
gaing strength in 10. sources in ten units and loses it in one source
in-one unit, it has to.its credit.9 units of strength after deduction:
without any evil, and therefore ii becomes extremely strong. But
if it ‘had 5 units of strength and five units of weakness it is really
not capable of producing any. perceptible results because the
strength and the weakness cancel each other and the planet has
none to its eredit for good.or evil. Its tendency, therefore, will be
te produce faintly that which is indicated by its own good or evil
nature. But ifit has all the ten units of weakness without any points
of strength to redeem it, it will certainly produce all the bad results
in full which are indicated by an evil planet of the first water.

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 144] =====
126 SARWARTHACHINTAMANI.

स्फुटग्रदान्खग्ममुखाश्वभावान्‌
ससन्विकावदक्समराखरसिद्धान्‌ ।
संपादयपूर्वोक्तविंचारलिद्च

बखनसं दिकंरंविदधग्य= ॥ १४५॥

 

Sranza 145.

Get the sphutas Jor.all grahas according to the two methods of
Drikshidda and Siddkantha, get all the calculations needed for the
Bhavasandhies, carefully apply the details given tn this chapter
entitled Soumgyadhaya, and then say what eack planet is worth,
after kuoweng all the Batas of the plaiets.

NOTES.

The adviee of the author is not too important and.timely. It
may safely be challenged that this sound advice of one of the
greatest astrologers of the middle ages, has been most shamefully
violated by the majority of the astrologers and hence the large
percentage of failures witnessed in the predictions they make. Gram-:
mar,is needed to construct the anxuage, but language also is abso-
lutely needed to construct and express the grammar. One can-
not exist without the help of the other. But there is some differ-
ence between the two, Language existed: without grammar for
a long time but in an imperfect state of development and wanted
the grammar to improve it and to give it a further stimulus to its
future progress. But grammar cannot exist without language, for
it has to be expressed in the language over which it tries to com-
mand at @ later stage. Siddhantha'and joytisha are something
like these. Astrology can exist without astronomy and did exist
without it. The Solar, Lunar, Stellar and Zodiacal influences were
felt, and their results were realised long before they were reduc-
ed to demonstrable calculations or astronomical methods. The.
intellect of man, the most wonderful: phenomenon in the world—
grasped various influences of the planets ‘before the mathematical
portion of astralogy—called astronomy;came to perfect'the judicial :
or the predictive portion... There-eam be no-astronomy without the

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 145] =====
Epvucation orn GENIUs. 127

planetary influences. The influences of planets form astrology
while their calculations, and divisions and sub-divisions have given
rise to the grand science of astronomy. This may be a little
startling to the world but if they carefully think over the problem
whether astrology or astronomy was the older of the two, they
will see the soundness of my views in declaring that astrology had
flourished long before astronomy came into vogue and obtained
the credit which itis now keeping. There are now many joisis—
astrologers and there are also many siddhanthees astroncmers.—
A happy combination of the two in one and the same individual
is a rarity and we may count their names almost on our fingers’ ends,
While mathematics are absolutely necessary for all astrological
calculations they deprive the possessor of that mathematical ability
and acumen, the excellent judgment—power in predictign, which
will be developed in aman, who has entirely devoted himself to the
predictive portion of it and to the observation of men who are so
many results of planetary influences. The best astronomers, as a
class, are sorry predictors, while the best astrologers guess the
combinations of planets, almost instinctively, at the time of birth
of a person without even a pretence of making the elementary
calculations.

To whom are we then to give the credit—whether to the
good astrologers who are able to make great national and indi-
vidual predictions which are verified at every turn or to the good
mathematicians who have reduced the plavetary influences into
exact calculations, who know the correct movements of the planets,
their eclipses, their combusts and their retrogrades and who have
benefitted the nations by the splendid-works they have composed ?

This is a physiologico-psychological question of great impor-
tance which involves a series of nice problems for solution

Mathematics, and all such calculations based upon mathema-
tics, make a man exact in reasoning, ready in perceiving objects
and their correct positions and argue in a perfectly deductive and
methodical way NMI Belle le

wee doe = +

===== [sarvartha-chintamani-1899-part-1 | PDF page 146] =====
130 SARWARTHACHINTAMANL,

writers. The real genius deals with these problems in altogether
a different way. To such men of genius these works give but
very little help. In the appendix to this work I shall explain the
mathematical portion of astrology. Siddhanta and Drigganitha
vary in giving the positions of planets at any given time to some
extent. Hd
Madhyagrahas and Sputagrahas also differ. The Saya-
na and Nirayana systems have to be noted. After obtaining
1 ||| 11. ध
Bhavasandhis have to be
attended to. Each Bhava
or house of signification
extends roughly over 30
degrees. Take an illus-
tration.

    
 

ध Satur
20° RahulBirth 14°) "` &° न

८

 

 
 
 
  
   
 

Jupiter
24° Sun
3° Mer-
cury 6°

 

 

Here it will be seen iit Zodiac
that the relative distan- |
ees.of the various planets |
have to be found out |
by Sputas. Take birth | Venns Mars 3°
which is 14° degrees in 21° Kethu 7°

 

 

Taurus. The distance
between the Moon and birth is 24 degrees. In making Bhavasna-
dhies we have to take 15 degrees on either side of a planet. This
isits first Bhava and those planets which are within 15 degrees of
itare really in the same house as the birth itself, although they may
apparently occupy the second sign from it. Moon here is in the
12th Bhava and the person lost his mother at an early age. I am
simply giving rough examples. There are differences even in
Bhavasandhies among the astrological writers into which 1
need not enter here. Take Rahu. He is in the 7th degree in
Medhe. ‘There is therefore 3° degrees between Rahu and birth
and although he appears in the 12th house he really is oceupying
the Lith which i good. I shall enter into these details tater on

in the appendix.
—— Sri

